4 t h E d i t i o n
D a w n A p g a r
Social Wo r k Fully Updated
Licensing
Clinical E x a m
G u i d e
Comprehensive ASWB LCSW Exam Review
Full Content Review, 500+ Total
Questions, and Practice Exams
• B a s e d o n t h e l a t e s t A S W B
c o n t e n t o u t l i n e
• 2 full-length practice exams
• All-new glossary of key
social work t e r m s
SPRINGER PUBLISHING
The following guides by Dawn Apgar are available from Springer
Publishing to assist social workers with studying for and passing
the ASWB® examinations necessary for licensure.
i
Bachelors
Social Work Licensing Bachelors Exam Guide, Fourth Edition
Test focuses on knowledge acquired while obtaining a Baccalaureate
degree in Social Work (BSW). A small number of jurisdictions license
social workers in the Associate category and require the ASWB
Associate examination. The Associate examination is identical to the
ASWB Bachelors examination, but the Associate examination
requires a lower score to pass.
Masters
Social Work Licensing Masters Exam Guide, Fourth Edition
Test focuses on knowledge acquired while obtaining a Masters
degree in Social Work (MSW). There is no postgraduate supervision
needed.
Clinical
Social Work Licensing Clinical Exam Guide, Fourth Edition
Test focuses on knowledge acquired while obtaining a Clinical
degree in Social Work (CSW). It is usually taken by those with
postgraduate supervised experience.
1
Dawn Apgar, PhD, LSW, ACSW, has helped thousands of social workers across the
ii
country pass the ASWB® examinations associated with all levels of licensure. She has
consulted with many universities and professional organizations to assist with establishing
licensure test preparation programs.
Dr. Apgar has done research on licensure funded by the American Foundation for
Research and Consumer Education in Social Work Regulation and has served as
chairperson of her state’s social work licensing board. She is a past President of the New
Jersey Chapter of NASW and has been on its National Board of Directors. In 2014, the
Chapter presented her with a Lifetime Achievement Award. Dr. Apgar has taught in both
undergraduate and graduate social work programs and has extensive direct practice, policy,
and management experience in the social work field.
2
Social Work
Licensing Clinical
Exam Guide
Comprehensive ASWB LCSW Exam
Review
iii
Fourth Edition
Dawn Apgar, PhD, LSW, ACSW
3
Copyright © 2025 Springer Publishing Company, LLC
All rights reserved.
First Springer Publishing edition 2016; subsequent edition 2017.
iv
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in
any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise,
without the prior permission of Springer Publishing Company, LLC, or authorization through
payment of the appropriate fees to the Copyright Clearance Center, Inc., 222 Rosewood
Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, 978-750-8400, fax 978-646-8600, info@copyright.com or on the
Web at www.copyright.com.
Springer Publishing Company, LLC
www.springerpub.com
Acquisitions Editor: Cynthia Kitchel
Compositor: Transforma
ISBN: 978-0-8261-9287-5
ebook ISBN: 978-0-8261-9288-2
DOI: 10.1891/9780826192882
24 25 26 27 / 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
The author and the publisher of this Work have made every effort to use sources believed to
be reliable to provide information that is accurate and compatible with the standards
generally accepted at the time of publication. The author and publisher shall not be liable for
any special, consequential, or exemplary damages resulting, in whole or in part, from the
readers’ use
of, or reliance on, the information contained in this book. The publisher has no responsibility
for the persistence or accuracy of URLs for external or third-party Internet websites referred
to in this publication and does not guarantee that any content on such websites is, or will
remain, accurate or appropriate.
Library of Congress Control Number: 2024902770
Contact us to receive discount rates on bulk purchases.
For more information please contact: sales@springerpub.com
Publisher’s Note: New and used products purchased from third-party sellers
are not guaranteed for quality, authenticity, or access to any included
digital components.
Printed in the United States of America.
4
To Bill, Ryan, and Alex
You remind me what is important, support me so I can do it all, and always inspire me to be
a better person.
5
Contents
vii
Preface
How to Use This Guide
Pass Guarantee
SECTION I: ABOUT THE EXAMINATION, STUDY
STRATEGIES, AND TEST-TAKING TIPS
The Licensure Examination
Test Construction
Types of Questions
Examination Structure and Conditions
Studying for the Examination
Study Materials and Time Frame
Considerations When Studying
Build Focus and Stamina
Prioritize Content
Concentrate on Understanding Over Memorization
Respect Learning Style
Manage Test Anxiety
Tips for Answering Questions Correctly
Using the Best Overall Approach
Remembering Important Question Features
Focusing on Question Formatting and Wording
SECTION II: CONTENT AND PRACTICE TEST FOR THE
ASWB CLINICAL EXAMINATION
6
Self-Assessment
Key Social Work Terms
viii
CONTENT AREA I: HUMAN DEVELOPMENT, DIVERSITY,
AND BEHAVIOR IN THE ENVIRONMENT (24%)
1. Human Growth and Development
Theories of Human Development Throughout the Lifespan (e.g.,
Physical, Social, Emotional, Cognitive, Behavioral)
Social Development
Emotional Development
Cognitive Development
Behavioral Development
The Indicators of Normal and Abnormal Physical, Cognitive,
Emotional, and Sexual Development Throughout the
Lifespan
Child Development
Adolescent Development
Adult Development
Theories of Sexual Development Throughout the Lifespan
Theories of Spiritual Development Throughout the Lifespan
Theories of Racial, Ethnic, and Cultural Development
Throughout the Lifespan
The Effects of Physical, Mental, and Cognitive Disabilities
Throughout the Lifespan
The Interplay of Biological, Psychological, Social, and Spiritual
Factors
Basic Human Needs
The Principles of Attachment and Bonding
The Effect of Aging on Biopsychosocial Functioning
Gerontology
Personality Theories
Biological
Behavioral
Psychodynamic
Humanist
7
Trait
Factors Influencing Self-Image (e.g., Culture, Race,
Religion/Spirituality, Age, Disability, Trauma)
Body Image and Its Impact (e.g., Identity, Self-Esteem,
Relationships, Habits)
Parenting Skills and Capacities
Authoritarian Parenting
Authoritative Parenting
Permissive Parenting
Uninvolved Parenting
Basic Principles of Human Genetics
The Family Life Cycle
Models of Family Life Education in Social Work Practice
The Impact of Aging Parents on Adult Children
Systems and Ecological Perspectives and Theories
Applications to Social Work
Some System Theory Terms
Strengths-Based and Resilience Theories
The Dynamics and Effects of Loss, Separation, and Grief
ix
2. Human Behavior in the Social Environment
Person-in-Environment (PIE) Theory
Family Dynamics and Functioning and the Effects on Individuals,
Families, Groups, Organizations, and Communities
The Dynamics of Interpersonal Relationships
Indicators and Dynamics of Abuse and Neglect Throughout the
Lifespan
Indicators and Dynamics of Sexual Abuse
Indicators and Dynamics of Psychological Abuse and Neglect
Indicators and Dynamics of Physical Abuse and Neglect
The Effects of Physical, Sexual, and Psychological Abuse on
Individuals, Families, Groups, Organizations, and
Communities
The Characteristics of Perpetrators of Abuse, Neglect, and
Exploitation
The Effects of Life Events, Stressors, and Crises on Individuals,
Families, Groups, Organizations, and Communities
8
The Impact of Stress, Trauma, and Violence
Crisis Intervention Theories
The Effect of Poverty on Individuals, Families, Groups,
Organizations, and Communities
The Impact of the Environment (e.g., Social, Physical, Cultural,
Political, Economic) on Individuals, Families, Groups,
Organizations, and Communities
Social and Economic Justice
Theories of Social Change and Community Development
The Impact of Social Institutions on Society
Family
Religion
Government
Education
Economics
The Impact of Globalization on Clients/Client Systems (e.g.,
Interrelatedness of Systems, International Integration,
Technology, Environmental or Financial Crises, Epidemics)
Criminal Justice Systems
The Impact of Out-of-Home Placement (e.g., Hospitalization,
Foster Care, Residential Care, Criminal Justice System) on
Clients/Client Systems
Theories of Couples Development
The Impact of Physical and Mental Illness on Family Dynamics
Co-Occurring Disorders and Conditions
The Impact of Caregiving on Families
Psychological Defense Mechanisms and Their Effects on
Behavior and Relationships
Addiction Theories and Concepts
Substance Use Disorder
Non-Substance-Related Disorders
Goals of Treatment
Stages of Treatment
Treatment Approaches
The Effects of Addiction and Substance Abuse on Individuals,
Families, Groups, Organizations, and Communities
The Indicators of Addiction and Substance Abuse
9
x
Signs of Drug Use
Role Theories
Feminist Theory
Theories of Group Development and Functioning
Key Concepts
Communication Theories and Styles
Theories of Conflict
3. Diversity and Discrimination
The Effect of Disability on Biopsychosocial Functioning
Throughout the Lifespan
The Effect of Culture, Race, and Ethnicity on Behaviors,
Attitudes, and Identity
Language and Communication
Geographic Location
Worldview, Values, and Traditions
Family and Kinship
Gender Roles
Socioeconomic Status and Education
Immigration and Migration
Sexuality
Perspectives on Health, Illness, and Healing
Religion and Spirituality
The Effects of Discrimination and Stereotypes on Behaviors,
Attitudes, and Identity
The Influence of Sexual Orientation on Behaviors, Attitudes, and
Identity
The Impact of Transgender and Transitioning Process on
Behaviors, Attitudes, Identity, and Relationships
Systemic (Institutionalized) Discrimination (e.g., Racism, Sexism,
Ageism)
The Principles of Culturally Competent Social Work Practice
Sexual Orientation Concepts
Gender and Gender Identity Concepts
Content Area I: Practice Questions
10
CONTENT AREA II: ASSESSMENT, DIAGNOSIS, AND
TREATMENT PLANNING (30%)
4. Biopsychosocial History and Collateral Data
The Components of a Biopsychosocial Assessment
Techniques and Instruments Used to Assess Clients/Client
Systems
Beck Depression Inventory
The Minnesota Multiphasic Personality Inventory
Myers–Briggs Type Indicator
Rorschach Inkblot Test
Stanford–Binet Intelligence Scale
Thematic Apperception Test
Wechsler Intelligence Scale
xi
The Types of Information Available From Other Sources (e.g.,
Agency, Employment, Medical, Psychological, Legal, or
School Records)
Components of a Sexual History
Components of a Family History
Methods to Obtain Sensitive Information (e.g., Substance Abuse,
Sexual Abuse)
The Principles of Active Listening and Observation
The Indicators of Sexual Dysfunction
Symptoms of Neurologic and Organic Disorders
5. Assessment and Diagnosis
The Factors and Processes Used in Problem Formulation
Methods of Involving Clients/Client Systems in Problem
Identification (e.g., Gathering Collateral Information)
Use of Collateral Sources
The Components and Function of the Mental Status Examination
Methods to Incorporate the Results of Psychological and
Educational Tests Into Assessment
The Indicators of Psychosocial Stress
The Indicators, Dynamics, and Impact of Exploitation Across the
Lifespan (e.g., Financial, Immigration Status, Sexual
11
Trafficking)
The Indicators of Traumatic Stress and Violence
Methods Used to Assess Trauma
Risk Assessment Methods
The Indicators and Risk Factors of the Client’s/Client System’s
Danger to Self and Others
Danger to Self: Suicide
Danger to Others: Violence
Methods to Assess the Client’s/Client System’s Strengths,
Resources, and Challenges (e.g., Individual, Family, Group,
Organization, Community)
The Indicators of Motivation, Resistance, and Readiness to
Change
Methods to Assess Motivation, Resistance, and Readiness to
Change
Methods to Assess the Client’s/Client System’s Communication
Skills
Methods to Assess the Client’s/Client System’s Coping Abilities
The Indicators of Client’s/Client System’s Strengths and
Challenges
Methods to Assess Ego Strengths
The Use of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental
Disorders of the American Psychiatric Association
Neurodevelopmental Disorders
Schizophrenia Spectrum and Other Psychotic Disorders
Bipolar and Related Disorders
Depressive Disorders
Anxiety Disorders
Obsessive-Compulsive and Related Disorders
Trauma- and Stressor-Related Disorders
Dissociative Disorders
Somatic Symptom and Related Disorders
Feeding and Eating Disorders
Elimination Disorders
Sleep–Wake Disorders
Sexual Dysfunctions
Gender Dysphoria
xii
12
Disruptive, Impulse-Control, and Conduct Disorders
Substance-Related and Addictive Disorders
Neurocognitive Disorders
Personality Disorders
Medication-Induced Movement Disorders and Other Adverse
Effects of Medication
The Indicators of Mental and Emotional Illness Throughout the
Lifespan
Biopsychosocial Factors Related to Mental Health
Biological Factors
Psychological Factors
Social Factors
Biopsychosocial Responses to Illness and Disability
Common Psychotropic and Non-Psychotropic Prescriptions and
Over-the-Counter Medications and Their Side Effects
Antipsychotics
Antimanic Agents (Mood Stabilizers)
Antidepressants
Antianxiety Drugs
Stimulants
Common Prescription Medications
The Indicators of Somatization
The Indicators of Feigning Illness
Basic Medical Terminology
The Indicators of Behavioral Dysfunction
Placement Options Based on Assessed Level of Care
Methods to Assess Organizational Functioning (e.g., Agency
Assessments)
Data Collection and Analysis Methods
6. Treatment Planning
Methods to Involve Clients/Client Systems in Intervention
Planning
Cultural Considerations in the Creation of an Intervention Plan
The Criteria Used in the Selection of Intervention/Treatment
Modalities (e.g., Client/Client System Abilities, Culture, Life
Stage)
13
The Components of Intervention, Treatment, and Service Plans
Theories of Trauma-Informed Care
Methods and Approaches to Trauma-Informed Care
The Impact of Immigration, Refugee, or Undocumented Status
on Service Delivery
xiii
Methods to Develop, Review, and Implement Crisis Plans
Discharge, Aftercare, and Follow-Up Planning
Techniques Used to Evaluate a Client’s/Client System’s Progress
Methods, Techniques, and Instruments Used to Evaluate Social
Work Practice
The Principles and Features of Objective and Subjective Data
Basic and Applied Research Design and Methods
Types of Research
Single-Subject Research
Methods to Assess Reliability and Validity in Social Work
Research
Content Area II: Practice Questions
CONTENT AREA III: PSYCHOTHERAPY, CLINICAL
INTERVENTIONS, AND CASE MANAGEMENT (27%)
7. Therapeutic Relationship
The Components of the Social Worker–Client/Client System
Relationship
The Principles and Techniques for Building and Maintaining a
Helping Relationship
Process of Engagement in Social Work Practice
The Dynamics of Power and Transparency in the Social Worker–
Client/Client System Relationship
The Social Worker’s Role in the Problem-Solving Process
Advocate
Broker
Change Agent
Counselor
Mediator
14
Methods to Clarify the Roles and Responsibilities of the Social
Worker and Client/Client System in the Intervention Process
The Concept of Acceptance and Empathy in the Social Worker–
Client/Client System Relationship
The Dynamics of Diversity in the Social Worker–Client/Client
System Relationship
The Effect of the Client’s Developmental Level on the Social
Worker–Client Relationship
The Impact of Domestic, Intimate Partner, and Other Violence on
the Helping Relationship
Cycle of Violence
Guidelines for Interventions
Verbal and Nonverbal Communication Techniques
The Concept of Congruence in Communication
Methods to Obtain and Provide Feedback
One-on-One Feedback
Intragroup Feedback
Group-to-Group Feedback
Consultative Feedback
360° Feedback
xiv
8. The Intervention Process
The Principles and Techniques of Interviewing (e.g., Supporting,
Clarifying, Focusing, Confronting, Validating, Feedback,
Reflecting, Language Differences, Use of Interpreters,
Redirecting)
The Phases of Intervention and Treatment
Micro
Mezzo
Macro
Problem-Solving Models and Approaches (e.g., Brief, Solution-
Focused Methods or Techniques)
Short-Term Interventions
The Client’s/Client System’s Role in the Problem-Solving
Process
Methods to Engage and Motivate Clients/Client Systems
15
Methods to Engage and Work With Involuntary Clients/Client
Systems
Limit-Setting Techniques
The Technique of Role Play
Role-Modeling Techniques
Techniques for Harm Reduction for Self and Others
Methods to Teach Coping and Other Self-Care Skills to
Clients/Client Systems
Client/Client System Self-Monitoring Techniques
Methods of Conflict Resolution
Crisis Intervention and Treatment Approaches
Anger Management Techniques
Relaxation Exercises
Cognitive Techniques
Communication Skills
Environmental Change
Stress Management Techniques
The Impact of Out-of-Home Displacement (e.g., Natural Disaster,
Homelessness, Immigration) on Clients/Client Systems
Methods to Create, Implement, and Evaluate Policies and
Procedures That Minimize Risk for Individuals, Families,
Groups, Organizations, and Communities
Psychotherapies
Psychoanalytic and Psychodynamic Approaches
Psychoanalytic Theory
Psychosexual Stages of Development
Individual Psychology
Self Psychology
Ego Psychology
Object Relations Theory
Cognitive and Behavioral Interventions
Steps in Cognitive Restructuring
Strengths-Based and Empowerment Strategies and
Interventions
Client/Client System Contracting and Goal-Setting Techniques
Change Strategies
xv
Partializing Techniques
16
Assertiveness Training
Task-Centered Approaches
Psychoeducation Methods (e.g., Acknowledging, Supporting,
Normalizing)
Group Work Techniques and Approaches (e.g., Developing and
Managing Group Processes and Cohesion)
Family Therapy Models, Interventions, and Approaches
Recognition of Functional Roles in Family Dynamics
Roles in Healthy Families
Strategic Family Therapy
Structural Family Therapy
Bowenian Family Therapy
Couples Interventions and Treatment Approaches
Permanency Planning
Mindfulness and Complementary Therapeutic Approaches
Techniques Used for Follow-Up
Time Management Approaches
Community Organizing and Social Planning Methods
Methods to Develop and Evaluate Measurable Objectives for
Client/Client System Intervention, Treatment, and/or Service
Plans
Primary, Secondary, and Tertiary Prevention Strategies
Primary Prevention
Secondary Prevention
Tertiary Prevention
The Indicators of Client/Client System Readiness for Termination
9. Service Delivery and Management of Cases
The Effects of Policies, Procedures, Regulations, and Legislation
on Social Work Practice and Service Delivery
The Impact of the Political Environment on Policy-Making
Theories and Methods of Advocacy for Policies, Services, and
Resources to Meet Clients’/Client Systems’ Needs
Methods of Service Delivery
The Components of Case Management
The Principles of Case Recording, Documentation, and
Management of Practice Records
17
Methods to Establish Service Networks or Community
Resources
Employee Recruitment, Training, Retention, Performance
Appraisal, Evaluation, and Discipline
Case Recording for Practice Evaluation or Supervision
Methods to Evaluate Agency Programs (e.g., Needs
Assessment, Formative/Summative Assessment, Cost-
Effectiveness, Cost-Benefit Analysis, Outcomes
Assessment)
The Effects of Program Evaluation Findings on Services
Quality Assurance, Including Program Reviews and Audits by
External Sources
xvi
10. Consultation and Interdisciplinary Collaboration
Leadership and Management Techniques
Models of Supervision and Consultation (e.g., Individual, Peer,
Group)
Individual
Peer Group
Facilitated Group
Educational Components, Techniques, and Methods of
Supervision
The Supervisee’s Role in Supervision (e.g., Identifying Learning
Needs, Self-Assessment, Prioritizing, etc.)
Methods to Identify Learning Needs and Develop Learning
Objectives for Supervisees
The Elements of Client/Client System Reports
The Elements of a Case Presentation
The Principles and Processes for Developing Formal Documents
(e.g., Proposals, Letters, Brochures, Pamphlets, Reports,
Evaluations)
Consultation Approaches (e.g., Referrals to Specialists)
Methods of Networking
The Process of Interdisciplinary and Intradisciplinary Team
Collaboration
The Basic Terminology of Professions Other than Social Work
(e.g., Legal, Educational)
18
Techniques to Inform and Influence Organizational and Social
Policy
Knowledge/Innovation
Social, Political, and Economic Conditions/Resources
Legal Issues/Laws
Institutional Influences
External Influences
Methods to Assess the Availability of Community Resources
Techniques for Mobilizing Community Participation
Methods to Establish Program Objectives and Outcomes
Governance Structures
The Relationship Between Formal and Informal Power
Structures in the Decision-Making Process
Formal Power
Informal Power
Accreditation and/or Licensing Requirements
Content Area III: Practice Questions
CONTENT AREA IV: PROFESSIONAL VALUES AND
ETHICS (19%)
11. Professional Values and Ethical Issues
Legal and/or Ethical Issues Related to the Practice of Social
Work, Including Responsibility to Clients/Client Systems,
Colleagues, the Profession, and Society
Techniques to Identify and Resolve Ethical Dilemmas
Essential Steps in Ethical Problem Solving
xvii
The Client’s/Client System’s Right to Refuse Services (e.g.,
Medication, Medical Treatment, Counseling, Placement, etc.)
Professional Boundaries In The Social Worker–Client/Client
System Relationship (e.g., Power Differences, Conflicts of
Interest, etc.)
Ethical Issues Related to Dual Relationships
Self-Disclosure Principles and Applications
The Principles and Processes of Obtaining Informed Consent
Legal and/or Ethical Issues Regarding Documentation
19
Legal and/or Ethical Issues Regarding Termination
Legal and/or Ethical Issues Related to Death and Dying
Research Ethics (e.g., Institutional Review Boards, Use of
Human Subjects, Informed Consent)
Ethical Issues in Supervision and Management
Methods to Create, Implement, and Evaluate Policies and
Procedures for Social Worker Safety
12. Confidentiality
The Use of Client/Client System Records
Legal and/or Ethical Issues Regarding Confidentiality, Including
Electronic Information Security
Legal and/or Ethical Issues Regarding Mandatory Reporting
(e.g., Abuse, Threat of Harm, Impaired Professionals, etc.)
13. Professional Development and Use of Self
Professional Values and Principles (e.g., Competence, Social
Justice, Integrity, and Dignity and Worth of the Person)
Professional Objectivity in the Social Worker–Client/Client
System Relationship
Techniques for Protecting and Enhancing Client/Client System
Self-Determination
Client/Client System Competence and Self-Determination (e.g.,
Financial Decisions, Treatment Decisions, Emancipation,
Age of Consent, Permanency Planning)
Emancipation and Age of Consent
The Influence of the Social Worker’s Own Values and Beliefs on
the Social Worker–Client/Client System Relationship
The Influence of the Social Worker’s Own Values and Beliefs on
Interdisciplinary Collaboration
The Impact of Transference and Countertransference in the
Social Worker–Client/Client System Relationship
The Impact of Transference and Countertransference Within
Supervisory Relationships
The Components of a Safe and Positive Work Environment
Social Worker Self-Care Principles and Techniques
Burnout, Secondary Trauma, and Compassion Fatigue
20
Evidence-Based Practice
Professional Development Activities to Improve Practice and
Maintain Current Professional Knowledge (e.g., In-Service
Training, Licensing Requirements, Reviews of Literature,
Workshops)
Content Area IV: Practice Questions
Full-Length Practice Test
170-Question Practice Test
Full-Length Practice Test Answers
Evaluation of Results
xviii
Index
21
Preface
xix
Congratulations on getting to this point in your social work career.
The decision to become licensed is significant, and passing the
licensing examination demonstrates that you have the basic
knowledge necessary to safely practice. Social workers are
employed in all kinds of settings including hospitals, correctional
facilities, mental health and addictions agencies, government offices,
and private practices. It is essential that those served have some
assurance that these practitioners are competent to provide the
services that they are charged with delivering. Regulation through
certification and licensure helps to assure that social workers will
interact in an ethical and safe manner, and there is oversight to
address actions that are not consistent with this standard.
Passing the licensing exam is only one step in becoming certified
or licensed, but it is usually the most difficult challenge faced after
graduating with your degree.
What does it take to pass the licensure exam?
A. Keeping calm when studying and taking the test
B. Analyzing the questions correctly
C. Knowing the social work content areas
Getting the correct answer to this question is easy as success
requires them all! You have acquired skills in all these areas during
your educational preparation for professional social work practice.
Remember what has worked for you in the past to manage anxiety
22
and learn new concepts. Passing the licensure examination requires
critical thinking and social workers are great at problem-solving or
coming up with logical solutions to problems.
Although there are other test preparation materials produced, this
guide provides all these essential elements in a single, manageable,
easy-to-use format.
Individuals who are studying for the social work licensing
examination have a primary concern and request. They are worried
that they do not know important information about the tests that will
prove to be a barrier to passing, and they want a “place” to go that
will have all the necessary materials in a single location. They want
to focus their efforts on studying for the exam–not hunting around for
what needs to be studied!
This guide was created based on this important information, and it
xx
has been gathered from thousands of social workers just like you.
Although it is not produced by or affiliated with ASWB in any way,
and does not guarantee a passing score on the examinations, the
test-taking techniques have been developed and used successfully
by others who were faced with the same challenge that you are–
others who are now certified and licensed social workers! They
found this information so helpful in passing because the skills that it
takes to be a good social worker in practice can be very different
than the skills that it takes to pass the examination.
This edition of the guide has greatly expanded content on study
and test-taking strategies, including effective ways to prepare for and
pass the licensing examination. Material on methods for analysing
questions correctly has been added, along with examples to illustrate
the strategies presented. Often social workers find this information
most helpful when preparing for and taking the licensing test.
Best wishes as you study. And remember that there is never only
one way to achieve a goal, so use this guide in a way that works for
you as you prepare. In choosing this guide as your roadmap, you
have taken an important first step on the journey of passing the
examination for certification and licensure
23
How to Use This Guide
xxi
This guide has been carefully constructed to provide social workers
with information on the licensure examination and how to properly
prepare in order to pass it; test-taking strategies and methods for
analysing the questions correctly; and the content areas which
comprise the test.
The first section of the guide contains essential material to
understand the best way to study, the logistics associated with taking
the examination, and help with identifying what is being asked in test
questions so that correct answers can be selected. Understanding
how the licensing exam is constructed is valuable as it helps to
identify priority areas for study. Anxiety is also reduced as there are
no surprises when showing up to testing centers or when taking the
licensure exams.
There are no “tricks” or “secrets” to help with passing licensure
tests, but there are mistakes that social workers commonly make
when studying and analyzing questions that lead to difficulties in
performance. This first section provides guidance that is invaluable if
taking the test for the first time or again due to not passing.
The second section of the guide has summary material on
all the content areas, competencies, and Knowledge, Skills, and
Abilities statements (KSAs) which are used by test developers to
formulate actual questions. Some test takers have referred to this
section as a “MSW Program in a Box,” as it contains a summary of
relevant concepts learned in a graduate social work program that
may be assessed on the test. The format of this section is identical
to the outline or “blueprint” for the examination with all four content
areas covered. Each chapter within a content area represents a
24
competency which has been identified as essential for testing. Lastly,
within each chapter is summary information on each of the KSAs
that can be tested on the exam. It is important to be familiar with all
the possible topics that can be assessed. Simply looking over the
table of contents for this section can be a helpful orientation to the
material that needs to be studied. This section ends with a full-length
practice test that can be used to simulate the actual examination
experience. Taking this “mock” test is a great way to culminate a
study plan and so is best done just before a scheduled test date.
25
Pass Guarantee
xxii
If you use this resource to prepare for your exam and do not pass,
you may return it for a refund of your full purchase price, excluding
tax, shipping, and handling. To receive a refund, return your product
along with a copy of your exam score report and original receipt
showing purchase of new product (not used). Product must be
returned and received within 180 days of the original purchase date.
Refunds will be issued within 8 weeks from acceptance and
approval. One offer per person and address. This offer is valid for
U.S. residents only. Void where prohibited. To initiate a refund,
please contact Customer Service at csexamprep@springerpub.com.
26
Section I
About the Examination,
Study Strategies, and
Test-Taking Tips
2
1
27
The Licensure Examination
Generally, when social workers are getting ready to take the
3
Association of Social Work Boards (ASWB®) tests, they are anxious
not only about knowing the content, but also about the examinations
themselves. They have many questions about the number of questions
that are asked and the number of correct answers required to pass.
Becoming familiar with the examination basics assists in increasing
comfort with the examination conditions and structure, thereby reducing
anxiety about the unknown.
TEST CONSTRUCTION
The foundation of licensure examination construction is an ASWB
practice analysis. The results of the practice analysis provide the
content outlines for the tests. The structure of this guide and the
material contained in it are based on the most recent content outline or
“blueprint” developed by ASWB for licensure tests.
While the methodology used to guide the practice analysis process
is complex, it is useful to understand some of the basics. In brief,
ASWB surveys licensees nationally about the extent to which they use
discrete knowledge items (known as the KSAs) in their current work
and the extent to which they are important in their jobs. Using these
survey results, as well as
subject matter experts to group and weight the items, ASWB constructs
content outlines or “blueprints” for their licensure tests. Each category
of examination—Bachelors, Masters, Clinical, and Advanced Generalist
—has a different content outline. However, these outlines have the
same basic structure:
■
28
Four content areas which are broad areas assessed on th
exams
■ Competencies which are meaningful sets of knowledge, skil
and abilities that are important within each content area
■ Knowledge, Skills, and Abilities statements (KSA
which describes a discrete knowledge component that is the bas
for individual exam questions that may be used to measure th
competency
The structure of ASWB’s content outlines can be conceptualized as a
4
funnel with content areas representing the broad domains on the
test, competencies consisting of more narrowly identified groupings of
topics, and KSAs as specific subjects which appear on the tests. There
are separate content outlines for each of the four ASWB examinations.
While there is some overlap, there are also discrete KSAs. The focus of
testing is to determine if social workers have the theoretical,
procedural, and factual information needed to practice. Becoming
familiar with the content areas, competencies, and KSAs (which are
described in the second section of the guide and are listed as its table
of contents) is a helpful study tip as test takers are required to
remember the requisite knowledge related to these topics to guide
them to the correct answers.
TYPES OF QUESTIONS
There are three types of questions—recall, application, and reasoning
—on the ASWB examinations. While each exam contains a mix of
these types, the composition varies depending upon the category, with
the Bachelors examination having more recall and application
questions and the Clinical and Advanced Generalist having more
application and reasoning questions. The Masters test has an equal
distribution of all three question types.
Recall questions require selection of answers based on
remembering learned material. Application questions require
using information in a straightforward, specific way, such as identifying
how knowledge would be used in specific settings, with target client
29
groups, and/or in various social work roles. Reasoning questions
require using knowledge to make judgments using theories, ethical
principles, or other social work content to drive decisions. Reasoning
questions are often scenarios or vignettes, which tend to be longer and
more complex. The content needed to answer each of the question
types is identical, but the degree to which the topics are easily
identifiable is not. Often test takers are not able to recognize that
knowledge related to certain KSAs must be applied or used in their
reasoning to get the correct answers as these KSAs are not explicitly
mentioned.
The following illustrates how information on common psychotropic
medications can be asked using all three question types.
Recall
Which medication is a mood stabilizer?
A. Haldol
B. Prozac
C. Lithium
Application
A client with bipolar disorder is being hospitalized. The client
is experiencing episodes of mania and depression. The client
is MOST likely going to be prescribed?
A. Haldol
B. Prozac
C. Lithium
Reasoning
A client is hospitalized due to feelings of severe
5
hopelessness and withdrawal. Upon intake, the client cries
uncontrollably throughout the interview. The family reports
periods of sleeplessness, excitement, and elevated energy by
the client weeks earlier. The primary intervention is the
30
prescription of a psychotropic medication. The drug will likely
aim to:
A. Ensure that the client does not experience delusions or
hallucinations
B. Alleviate the client’s depression
C. Stabilize the client’s mood swings
The answer to all three of these questions is the same–C. The
recall question simply requires identifying lithium as a mood stabilizer
whereas understanding that lithium, as a mood stabilizer, is used for
the treatment of bipolar disorder is needed to correctly answer the
application question. The reasoning question, which is the most
complex of the three types, provides the symptoms of bipolar disorder,
requiring first the diagnosis and then the identification of a medication
that aims to stabilize the mood swings as the primary aim of the
intervention.
EXAMINATION STRUCTURE AND CONDITIONS
ASWB offers valuable information about its licensure tests on its
website–www.aswb.org. It may be useful to look at the ASWB
Examination Guidebook, which is free and located there. It is not a test
preparation resource, but it does contain descriptions of how to register
for the exams, security protocols, monitoring of results, and other
testing logistics. All the information needed by most test takers is
summarized below.
All the ASWB examinations (Bachelors, Masters, Clinical, and
Advanced Generalist) have the same format.
Tests in all categories consist of 170 multiple-choice questions which
must be answered in
4 hours from the time that the first question is seen. The examination is
computerized but requires no specialized computer knowledge. There
is a brief computer tutorial that assists with orientation to the software
program. Spending time getting comfortable with the device is a good
31
idea, since it does not count toward the 4-hour time limit. Brief restroom
breaks are allowed, but the clock does not stop so these activities must
be included in the 4-hour limit. It is important to be judicious with the
time taken for breaks.
Only 150 of the 170 questions answered are used to determine
whether a passing score is achieved.
Although 170 questions are answered, 20 of these questions are not
scored as they are being piloted for possible inclusion as scored
questions on future ASWB examinations. Thus, only
150 questions are used to determine a passing score. The 20 pilot
items are never identified (even after the test is over) and are dispersed
among scored items, so it is important to treat all 170 questions as
critical.
No questions should be left blank; it is important to answer all 170
6
questions in the 4 hours.
The licensure test is a national examination that can be used for
licensure in multiple states.
It is possible to take the examination in any state/jurisdiction, even if it
is not the one in which licensure is sought. In addition, a social worker
does not need to live in a state/jurisdiction to be licensed there. Social
workers can hold licenses in multiple states/jurisdictions and often do
as they may be required when doing telehealth or providing other
services to clients who live in states/jurisdictions that are different from
those in which social workers live.
Licensure examinations are administered at a variety of times, but
appointments are needed. Select a time when personal performance is
at its peak. The exam is lengthy, so avoid taking it in the afternoon if
you are a morning person or early in the morning if you are “a night
owl.” There are rules about scheduling and cancelling appointments
which need to be closely followed. This information is available on
ASWB’s website (www.aswb.org).
Testing is closely monitored so it is important to be familiar with
what’s allowed and not allowed. Details can be found on the ASWB
website.
Non-standard testing arrangements (accommodations) for the
licensure test must be approved in advance.
32
All testing accommodations related to documented disabilities must be
approved by the licensing board and arranged in advance with ASWB.
Extra time is the most common accommodation granted. Some states
allow for these accommodations for those for whom English is not a
first language; others do not. When registering for the examination with
ASWB, there is a form that must be completed with appropriate
supporting documentation. ASWB works with states/jurisdictions to
review and grant requests as appropriate. It is important that non-
standard testing arrangements be approved prior to arrival at testing
centers, as there are strict rules which must be followed by site
personnel who do not have the authority to change them without
approved accommodations.
Examinations are scored immediately, and unofficial results are
provided.
After completing the examination, there is a brief survey given about
the testing experience. The computer then scores the test and the
results (pass/not pass) are provided immediately. When passing, a
brief report is provided with the test taker’s name, test category
(Bachelors, Masters, Clinical, or Advanced Generalist), test date,
state/jurisdiction, and test performance (number of questions correct
with the number needed to pass). These results are “unofficial” as they
still must be securely transmitted electronically to the licensing board of
any designated state/jurisdiction. The results do not change but must
be securely transmitted to be “official.”
When not passing, a brief summary is also provided. It lists the four
content areas and the number of questions asked in each of the four
domains. It also lists the number of questions answered correctly in
each of these areas. However, which specific questions are answered
correctly or incorrectly is never known. The exam is pass/fail, and a
passing score can be used for certification or licensure in any state.
If there are questions about the process for sending passing exam
scores to other states/jurisdictions for licensure, the ASWB website
(www.aswb.org) must be consulted as it has the necessary forms and
fees.
Questions to test the four content areas are in random order.
33
Although the KSAs are in four broad content areas which may be
used to structure studying, the questions on the examination are in
7
random order and skip across topics. There are not separate sections
for human development, ethics, and so on. In fact, the specific KSA
being tested by each question is not listed. Being successful requires
test takers to identify the specific knowledge areas and the requisite
content to get the questions correct.
It is important not to skip around and be prepared for having
questions on different content areas intermixed with one another. Each
question stands alone to assess knowledge related to a distinct KSA.
Avoid relating questions to one another and be prepared to shift focus
for each question asked. The good news is that this structure allows
questions on topics which are more familiar to be intermixed with those
in areas which may be more challenging. If the answer to a question is
not known, be assured that the next one will likely be on a topic that is
more familiar.
The number of questions needed to get correct to pass varies.
Social workers always want to know how many questions of the 150
scored items they need to answer correctly to pass the exam. Although
this sounds like an easy question, it is not! Not all questions on the
ASWB examinations are the same level of difficulty as determined by
the pilot process, so individuals who are randomly assigned harder
versions of the exams need to answer fewer questions correctly than
those who were lucky enough to have easier questions. This method
ensures that the examination is fair for all those who are taking it,
regardless of which questions were chosen. The number of questions
needed to get correct generally varies from 90 to 107 of the 150 scored
items. The pass point for the version of the examination taken is only
revealed after the test is finished and scored electronically. On the
unofficial score report, the exam score and pass point are listed.
It is possible to use this report to gauge the difficulty of the
examination taken compared with other test versions available within a
category (Bachelors, Masters, Clinical, and Advanced Generalist). The
version is randomly selected and cannot be requested. If the pass point
needed is closer to 90, the version had harder questions, and if it is
closer to 107, it had easier ones. On average, most test takers have
pass points which are close to 100 questions.
34
Repeat test takers do not have the same questions when retaking
the examination.
Many people do not pass licensure examinations the first time and
need to retake them, which is allowable after 90 days. Unfortunately,
test takers need to pay for the examination each time that it is taken.
Often those retaking the tests go home and look up information on
topics with which they struggled. While it is always good to fill in
knowledge gaps, the same questions will not appear on examinations
taken in the future. Other questions in the four areas are selected. As
the four domains are so broad, the foci of the questions may be quite
different. To be adequately prepared, it is best to go back and study all
the KSAs listed in content areas associated with poor performance. Do
not exclusively focus on only those which appeared previously on the
tests. The 90-day wait period allows for additional studying and gives
ASWB time to ensure that different versions of the examinations, with
new questions, are available for repeat test takers.
8
35
Studying for the Examination
Social workers studying for the ASWB examinations always want
9
techniques that assist them in answering questions correctly. While
test-taking tips can be helpful, they are no replacements for good old-
fashioned studying of ­ content. Test-taking tips are not enough on their
own to eliminate all the incorrect response choices. It is knowledge of
the content area that is needed to select the correct answer from
response choices that are incorrect. Thus, a study strategy aims to
ensure that the content on the examination is familiar and can be
applied to the ­ scenarios which appear on the test.
Study strategies appear before test-taking tips in this guide as
knowledge of the content areas must be attained before applying
certain techniques to eliminate incorrect response choices. Test takers
usually have their own methods for studying based upon their learning
styles and the time till their test dates. There is no set number of hours
that is required since some test takers are well-versed in the content
areas and others need more time as they have forgotten or not learned
key concepts. Regardless of the study period, it is essential to have a
defined study plan which includes time set aside to review the content.
This chapter provides useful information that can help guide this
process, including picking a study style based on learning style and
managing test anxiety.
STUDY MATERIALS AND TIME FRAME
Social workers who are studying for the ASWB tests have lots of
questions about the value of study materials and the time needed to
prepare. They are often overwhelmed with advertisements from exam
preparation companies and do not have methods for evaluating their
worth. In addition, there are pressures to take the licensing exams, but
36
uncertainty about whether taking them too quickly will have negative
outcomes. The answers to the following frequently asked questions
provide critical guidance in identifying appropriate study materials and
the length of time needed to pass.
Q: What material must be studied for the licensure examination?
The licensure tests assess knowledge of social work content, so it is
imperative to focus on scholarly material to help fill in the gaps and
make sure that there is adequate knowledge of the key concepts and
terms related to the KSAs. Readiness to take the examinations can be
assessed by the extent to which content on each of the KSAs can be
briefly explained to someone who does not have any prior knowledge
of them. The difference between passing and not passing the
examinations almost always is a result of gaps in knowledge, not
application of test-taking strategies, so the bulk of studying must be
aimed at filling in knowledge gaps or refreshing information already
learned.
The good news is that studying for the licensure examinations really
10
begins the first day of any social work program as the KSAs
represent information that it taught in any accredited institution. The
topics look familiar as they are the focus of many social work courses.
As there are many KSAs that may be assessed, it is necessary to
know a little bit about a lot of topics. Limiting studying to this guide or
other key resources that summarize material is the best method. This is
not the time to go back and read textbooks! There are so many topics
assessed that it is not possible or practical to know everything related
to them. This guide is geared to provide important information on these
areas “under one roof.” Those who pass state that they are only tested
on a small portion of the content contained in this guide. Remember
that not all the KSAs are on any one examination.
It is hard enough to read through all the material in this guide. Using
outside resources must be done on a limited basis. If used,
supplemental study materials must be scholarly (written by social
workers with education and training–do not rely on content from
websites/companies where authors’ degrees are unknown), free (there
is no need to pay for academic content as there are many scholarly
resources available free online), and brief (quick summaries and
overviews which are less than a page on a given topic are best as they
37
highlight the most salient information). In addition, it is important not to
fall prey to solicitations for “secrets” to pass the test. Study materials
must reflect that which is taught in social work programs. Unfortunately,
many other licensure preparation materials are not written by social
workers so their content does not reflect that which is important and
unique to the profession.
The content in this guide assumes that test takers have learned
about these KSAs previously in their social work programs. If material
is unclear or it was never learned, some supplemental information may
be needed to fill in knowledge gaps. In these instances, it is best to use
free resources on the internet or any other documents that have no
more than a paragraph summarizing key points. Remember, it is not
necessary to read a book on Freud to understand his work and its
importance in explaining human development.
In addition, there is always a time lag between the generation of
new social work content and when it appears on the ASWB
examinations. It takes time to write and pretest questions on new
material. Thus, there is no need to worry about recent innovations
appearing on the licensing test. The bulk of the content focuses on
theoretical underpinnings of the social work profession that do not
change dramatically or quickly over time.
The exam content outlines, with the accompanying content areas,
competencies, and KSAs, change very little over time. This consistency
is good and bad. The good news is that there is no need to know the
“latest and greatest” in all content areas. It is hard to keep completely
up to date in a profession that is changing so rapidly. Now for the bad
news! For many, especially if they are working in specialty areas, some
of the content or answers may appear to be dated. This is often the
case related to psychopharmacology because new medications are
being approved and used rapidly. Remember the time lapse when
studying, and do not rely on breaking news or even agency practices
which may be using more current protocols.
Q: How much time must be spent studying as I want to pick a test
date?
This question is impossible to answer as some test takers know the
11
content and are ready to take examinations once they are familiar
with exam format and structure, as well as the test-taking strategies.
38
Others need to spend time studying content that was forgotten or not
learned.
However, most test takers never feel “ready” to take the ASWB
examinations. Not unlike other standardized examinations, such as the
Scholastic Aptitude Test (SAT) or Graduate Record Examination
(GRE), readiness cannot be judged by knowing everything about the
content areas. The ASWB examinations are not designed for test
takers to “know it all” to pass. Often, picking a test date is the hardest
task; as with the SAT or GRE, a deadline for admission to college or
graduate school forces individuals to select dates even when they do
not feel ready. For the ASWB examination, it will be necessary to select
dates in the next few weeks or months, perhaps dictated by job
opportunities or promotions predicated on being licensed. It is typical
that test takers walk into the ASWB examinations without feeling totally
ready or satisfied with the amount of time that they had to prepare.
Often confidence is boosted by picking test dates and developing
detailed study goals to be accomplished before those dates. Some fit
their studying into shorter time frames in which they spend a lot of time
over several days or weeks reviewing the material and others complete
these reviews more slowly. Whatever strategy chosen, it is great to
take the tests knowing that study plans were actually followed and time
allotted for studying was actually spent.
Q: How do I get access to sample questions as I want to use them
for studying?
Although individuals like to study from sample questions, this is not
advisable to only rely on questions as study materials. There are many
reasons for this recommendation, but here are just a few.
1. Although it makes test takers feel better when they get answe
correct on sample questions, getting correct answers is not a va
indicator of really knowing all the requisite content about the KSA
Studying information on the KSAs directly increases the ability
answer all questions on these topics, not just particular samp
questions.
2. Answers to sample questions inappropriately influence decisio
made on the actual examinations when asked about similar topic
39
For example, seeing answers that are similar to ones that we
correct or incorrect for sample questions increases or decreases th
likelihood of selecting or eliminating them based upon this pri
experience. However, questions in the “real” examination are n
exactly the same as the ones seen during studying and it
essential to evaluate all response choices independently, witho
any undue bias that may be caused by use of prior samp
questions.
3. The sample questions studied are not going to be on actu
examinations and probably are not even written by those wh
developed the licensure tests. Thus, the idea that many soc
workers have of wanting to “get into the head” of the individua
writing the exam or understand their logic is not valid–though
might make them good clinicians in real life! Unfortunately, many
the sample question apps and resources for purchase for the ASW
examinations are not even written by social workers! Thus, trying
figure out why answers are correct which were not selected may b
futile as the questions may not be actually testing social wo
content.
It is a good idea to take a “mock” examination which mimics the
12
actual licensure test in length, composition, and question format.
There is such an examination in the back of this guide. Additionally,
ASWB sells full-length practice tests to those who are registered to
take their exams. The best way to use a full-length practice test is as
follows.
1. After studying is completed and readiness to take the actual ASW
examination has been assessed, select a 4-hour period where th
mock examination can be completed in a quiet environment witho
interruptions.
2. Answer the questions as if it were the actual examination–using th
strategies and having to pick one answer–even if you are n
completely sure that it is correct.
3. Keep track of the time even if short bathroom breaks are take
Finishing the full-length practice test demonstrates the ability to g
through 170 questions in the 4 hours allotted. This experienc
40
should relieve some anxiety about the timed nature of th
examination. Most people complete the actual examinations in 3
3.5 hours so there is no need to worry about finishing as long
problem solving is continuing and answers are selected even whe
there may not be complete certainty that they are correct.
4. Score the full-length practice test after completing it. Resist the urg
to look at the answer key to see if questions are correct immediate
after answering them. A “mock” examination is not to be used
determine readiness to take the actual test. Instead, it provides a
idea of the length of the examination and how much focus
needed, in addition to boosting confidence that all questions can b
answered in the time allotted.
CONSIDERATIONS WHEN STUDYING
Good study skills are essential when preparing for the ASWB licensure
examinations. It can seem overwhelming to get ready for these high-
stakes tests. Studying requires discipline and motivation. There are a
few strategies that increase the likelihood of passing. Studying that
builds focus and stamina, prioritizes content that is likely to be on the
tests, and increases understanding results in better outcomes and
leads to greater success.
Build Focus and Stamina
Most test takers have not taken standardized multiple-choice 4-hour
examinations for a long time–if ever! Social workers’ lives are hectic,
and they rarely get a chance to really focus on a single task or have the
luxury of thinking about a single topic in a deep, critical manner. Thus,
many people find it helpful to study in 4-hour blocks of time rather than
for a few minutes here and there. Carving out this time may be difficult,
but it is beneficial because it also helps with building up concentration
and focus. Remember, runners do not start with marathons; they need
to build their strength and endurance over time before they can tackle
26.2 miles.
Many social workers who have passed the ASWB examinations
complain about how hard it was to stay focused and how exhausting
they were after finishing their tests. Preparation needs to include
41
building up focus and stamina. The first time that test takers are
engaged in critical thinking related to the content areas for 4 hours
should not be during their actual examinations!
Prioritize Content
Think about the vast amount of information that is available on each
13
of the KSAs listed in the content areas. Often social workers have
trouble prioritizing the content that is important and determining how
much depth of knowledge is needed in each of the topics contained in
this guide. It is important to recognize that social workers who have
attended social work programs at different schools, as well as courses
within these programs taught by various faculty, have passed the
examinations. Thus, it cannot be about specific details or stories told by
one professor, but instead the “core” elements included in any overview
or lecture on a topic, regardless of school or professor. These elements
are the ones that must be learned and remembered because they are
the basic concepts related to the knowledge being tested.
In addition, there are also “core” or essential areas seen as critical
to competent practice. Can you imagine social workers leaving
undergraduate or graduate programs without reviewing the signs of
child abuse and neglect and the duty of mandatory reporting? Of
course not! Child abuse and neglect are “core” topics that often are the
basis of examination questions. The list of these areas is not fixed but
includes confidentiality, assessment of danger to self and others,
professional boundaries, self-determination, cultural awareness, and so
on. When studying, prioritize areas that every social worker needs to
know, regardless of setting or specialization. These topics are likely to
be asked about on the examinations.
Concentrate on Understanding Over Memorization
When studying, it is not necessary to memorize content because terms
or definitions need not be recalled from memory. ASWB examinations
do not require memorization. Instead, test takers need to distinguish
one answer, from several, that most directly relates to a topic or is
essential based on knowledge of the content area. Thus,
understanding is critical as most questions relate to application or
reasoning. Test takers must be able to explain the importance of each
KSA, rather than memorizing fancy terms or facts. Memorizing can lead
42
to superficial understanding of concepts, which is not useful for the
ASWB examinations.
Often, social workers are focused on using the clinical and other
jargon that they learned in their social work programs; however, they
may be unable to explain what these concepts mean in plain and
understandable terms. For example, when asked what should happen
when meeting with clients for the first time, social workers often use
phrases such as, “You need to build rapport,” “It is essential that you
start where a client is,” or “Social workers should show empathy as to
what a client is going through.” Though all true, these statements give
little insight into any real actions that social workers must take in these
first meetings. What should a social worker do to “build rapport”? How
would a client know if a social worker is being “empathetic”? What
would a social worker be doing or saying? Having to explain KSAs to
those who know little about social work practice and ask lots of
questions about the content area is far better than studying with social
work colleagues who do not challenge the use of jargon or technical
terms which can be confusing and do not include essential basics.
The following questions can serve as a quick assessment of
whether requisite knowledge and understanding have been obtained.
What are the most relevant points
1. 14
related to this KSA that would be
contained in a 5-minute “lecture” on the topic? If they cannot be
easily identified, then more studying is needed!
2. What is the relevancy of this KSA to social work practice and ho
social workers use this information to make decisions whe
interacting with clients? Most questions require information to b
applied in specific scenarios.
3. How does this KSA relate to the assessment and treatment
clients? Does it in any way impact problems or issues that they ma
be experiencing? More than half of the examination focuses o
assessment, planning, and intervention (the second and thi
content areas), so using knowledge for reasoning in these areas
essential.
In order to get correct answers, exam questions require broad
application of key concepts related to theories (e.g., the understanding
43
that what happens to a client early in life can influence later functioning)
or specific terms associated with these areas, even if the constructs are
not mentioned (e.g., picking a response that best represents “family
homeostasis”). For those areas in which requisite knowledge is
possessed, only a quick review by reading through the content outlined
in the subsequent pages of this guide is needed. If there are gaps in
knowledge, more detailed studying may be needed.
Respect Learning Style
There are different learning styles that dictate methods that are most
effective when having to fill in gaps in knowledge. Determining which
one best fits can help ensure that studying results in learning and
expedite the study process.
Visual Learners
Visual learners learn best through what they see. Although lectures can
be boring for visual learners, they benefit from the use of diagrams,
PowerPoint slides, and charts.
■ Use colored highlighters in this guide to draw attention to key terms
■ Develop outlines or take notes on the concepts in this guide.
■ Write talking points for each of the KSAs on separate white inde
cards.
■ Create a coding schema of symbols and write them in this guid
next to material and terms that require further study.
■ Study in an environment that is away from visual distractions suc
as television, people moving around, or clutter.
Auditory Learners
Auditory learners learn best through what they hear. They may have
difficulty remembering material that they read in this guide but can
easily recall it if it is read to them.
■ Tape-record yourself summarizing the material –listen back
reinforce what was read.
44
■ Have a study partner explain the relevant concepts and term
related to the KSAs.
■ Read the text from this guide aloud to assist with rememberin
content.
Find free, short online podcasts or YouTube videos on the
■15
content areas to assist with learning.
■ Talk to yourself about the content when studying–emphasizing wh
is important to remember related to each KSA.
Kinesthetic or Hands-On Learners
Kinesthetic learners learn through tactile approaches aimed at
experiencing or doing. They need activities and physical activities as a
foundation for instruction.
■ Make flashcards on material because writing it down assists w
remembering the content.
■ Use as many different senses as possible when studying–rea
material when on the treadmill, use highlighters, talk aloud abo
content, and/or listen to a study partner.
■ Develop mnemonic devices to aid in information retention (e.g
EAPIET or EAt PIE Today is a great way to remember the soc
work problem-solving process–Engaging, Assessing, Plannin
Intervening, Evaluating, and Terminating).
■ Write notes and important terms in the margins of this guide.
■ Find a study partner and quiz each other on material–turn it into
game and compare the length of time that a KSA can be discusse
before running out of material.
MANAGE TEST ANXIETY
Perhaps one of the biggest issues that social workers need to address
when preparing for and actually taking the examinations is anxiety.
Although not designed to be an exhaustive resource on how to address
test anxiety, this guide would be incomplete if it did not provide some
45
guidance to assist with anxiety during this stressful time in professional
development.
It is important to acknowledge that anxiety can be useful during this
process because it helps prioritize studying above other demands in
everyday life. There are no methods to acquire the needed knowledge
besides good old-fashioned studying. Anxiety can be a motivator to
keep going over the material even when there are more interesting
things to do!
Remember, everyone who is studying for the examinations is
feeling the same way. Stress and anxiousness are typical so do not feel
alone.
However, it is essential to manage this anxiety, and there are
several strategies that can help.
1. Make a Study Plan and Work the Plan
A great way to instill confidence is being able to walk into the
testing center having followed a structured study plan. A study
plan helps break the material into smaller manageable
segments and avoid last-minute cramming.
2. Do Not Forget the Basics
It is important not to neglect biological, emotional, and social
needs leading up to and on the day of the examination. Get
plenty of rest, build in relaxation time, and eat well to avoid
exhaustion during this preparation process.
3. Be Familiar With the Test Environment
Before the day of the examination, be familiar with the testing
conditions. On the day of the test, be prepared early to avoid
feeling rushed. Take time to carefully review the tutorial on the
computer before starting to answer questions to avoid wasting
time during the exam.
Use Relaxation Techniques
4. 16
Breathe and remember to relax during the examination. Simply
shutting your eyes or stretching your neck several times during
the 4-hour exam can help with refocusing.
5. Put the Examination Into Perspective
46
Rarely do people get the score they want the first time taking
any standardized test. Taking the SAT or GRE more than once
is the rule rather than the exception. Social workers often attach
too much meaning to whether they pass the ASWB examination
the first or second time. They feel their entire career rests on the
results. This is not true. There are many outstanding social
workers who have had to take the test multiple times. The test
can be retaken so remember that this is not the only chance to
pass. Do not let the test define self-worth and avoid thinking in
“all or nothing” terms.
6. Expect Setbacks
The road to licensure is not different than other journeys in life
and not usually without unexpected delays or even
disappointments. It is important to see these as typical parts of
the process and not ends in themselves. Try to figure out why
these setbacks in studying or passing occurred and how they
can be used as feedback for making improvements. The hard
work associated with getting a social work degree certainly
causes some disappointments and challenges. Studying for and
passing the examination is also not easy, but success is
possible with keeping focused and learning from challenges
encountered.
7. Reward Yourself
Do not wait until passing to celebrate. Build some enjoyment
into the test-taking experience by creating little incentives or
rewards along the way. Go out to dinner after having studied for
4 hours on a Saturday afternoon. Get up early and study before
work to enjoy a movie when arriving home. Making the study
process more fun can result in studying more and improve
performance on the examination.
8. Acknowledge and Address the Anxiety
Ignoring the anxiety that accompanies this process does not
help as it is not possible to completely eliminate it through the
techniques mentioned. However, assessment is needed to
determine whether it is manageable and can be addressed by
some of these suggestions or it is interfering so significantly with
47
the learning process that it results in “blanking out” or problems
in other life areas. If the latter is the case, more intensive
anxiety-reduction interventions are needed. Repeatedly studying
the content over and over does not reduce anxiety. Although
most people can develop their own strategies for anxiety
management, others need outside help. Usually, individuals who
need the assistance of others are those who have experienced
anxiety in their lives prior to this experience. No matter what the
severity–anxiety management is a critical part of every study
plan!
48
Tips for Answering Questions
Correctly
In addition to the development of a sound study plan, it is important to
17
use strategies to help distinguish correct answers from incorrect
response choices. These are not “secrets” or “tricks”–they are
approaches that assist with reading the questions, understanding what is
being asked, and applying critical social work content. There are common
mistakes that social workers initially make when trying to answer ASWB
exam questions as they test content in a standardized way. The following
tips assist with using a thoughtful approach to question analysis, as well
as provide important principles to remember when answering questions
on the exam.
USING THE BEST OVERALL APPROACH
The KSA being assessed must be identified before looking at the
response choices.
It is essential that questions are thoroughly understood before looking at
the response choices. The most difficult part of selecting the correct
answer is identifying the knowledge area and KSA that is being tested. To
ensure that proper attention is given to understanding the question, a
multistep process must be undertaken.
1. Read the question exactly as it is written, paying attention to k
words and those in quotes. Do not look at the response choices yet!
2. Ask “What is this question about?” to determine which of the KSAs
being tested.
49
3. Think about the important concepts related to the KSA; they a
essential in distinguishing the correct answers from the incorrect one
4. Examine the question again to confirm that any assumption abo
which KSA is being tested is correct and to determine how th
important concepts related to the KSA are relevant to the question.
5. Now look at the response choices for the first time! Read ea
carefully.
6. Eliminate any that do not appear to be correct. If more than o
response choice appears to be viable, go back and read the questio
again–looking only at the remaining response choices left.
It is sometimes difficult to eliminate incorrect response choices
18
immediately, so this process may involve multiple iterations. Each time
a response choice is eliminated, read the question and the response
choices that are left. Going back to the question each time that a
response choice is eliminated helps with keeping focused on critical
content which is contained in the question.
Often test takers spend more time reading and debating between the
response choices than critically analyzing questions, which is a big
mistake!
When response choices are proper names, read and think about
them before looking at questions.
While many questions have response choices which are long, there are
others that consist of proper names, such as those of clinical terms,
diagnoses, theories, or medications. When asked to select between listed
terms, diagnoses, theories, or medications, it is best to read the response
choices first and think about their usage, meanings, and/or applications
before looking at the questions. This approach allows the use of evidence
in the questions to support or help eliminate response choices based on
actual knowledge about these concepts, without being biased by question
wording.
If terms, diagnoses, theories, or medications listed as response
choices are unknown before reading the questions, they must be
eliminated and only those with which there is some textbook familiarity
should be considered. There is a natural tendency to gravitate toward
selecting proper names that sound good or like they “fit” without really
50
understanding their meaning. This mistake can be avoided by making
sure that only response choices which are understood with 100%
certainty are considered. If those which are known can be eliminated,
“mystery” terms, diagnoses, theories, or medications can then be
considered.
Increasing your familiarity with key social work terms will help
increase your success as it will make it easier to distinguish between the
response choices provided. This study guide has an important section
that defines key social work terms to assist you in your studying.
Answers must be selected for all questions–avoid skipping around
or leaving answers blank.
There is plenty of time to answer the questions in the 4-hour period
allotted for the test. Although the examination is timed, most people have
no issue with test completion, but are very nervous about the time and
feel rushed due to anxiety. Often that anxiety can fuel the desire to leave
questions blank if answers are unknown or to skip around to find
questions that are more familiar. Such an approach is a mistake. The
questions should be answered in the order in which they are listed.
Skipping around wastes time. The most time spent must be on identifying
the KSA being tested or what the question is asking. Not answering a
question after this analysis has occurred serves no purpose because no
more information will be available later in the examination. An answer
needs to be selected before moving on. Also, an answer must be
selected after reading the question a few times and applying the
strategies. Individuals who run out of time are “stuck” because they are
waiting for the feeling of certainty in their answers that does not come in
these types of standardized examinations.
Lastly, the computer can be used to “flag” questions for which correct
answers are uncertain. Flagging must be avoided and only used for a few
questions throughout the examination. There is really no reason to flag
as, again, there will be no more information to help with selecting correct
answers or eliminating incorrect response choices later in the
examination. Flagging can cause increased unnecessary anxiety. Even
when passing, test takers get a lot of questions incorrect. There is no
reason to keep identifying uncertainty about whether questions are
correct through flagging.
The “best” response choice is not always the correct answer.
51
Standardized examinations are often difficult and test takers find
themselves struggling to identify the correct answer from several listed
19
response choices. In these instances, social workers can make a
common mistake such as selecting the response choice that has catchy
social work phrases, such as “from a client’s perspective” or “focus on a
client’s strengths and skills.” Although these are important social work
concepts, they need to relate to the KSA being tested. If response
choices are judged solely based on the inclusion of important social work
terms–independent of what the question is really asking–it is easy to be
drawn to the “best” ones (judged solely based on the inclusion of social
work jargon) even when they are not correct.
One way to avoid making this mistake is to go back and reread the
question when debating between response choices. Often test takers
struggle with choosing between response choices without going back to
questions to reconfirm the KSAs being tested. Simply debating between
response choices, without reviewing questions again, may lead to picking
the “best” ones based on compelling social work content or terms–rather
than their connection to the content areas.
Do not “fight” the standardized approach to testing of social work
knowledge!
ASWB examinations assess knowledge of social work content in a
standardized way. Often, what is learned in the classroom is very different
than practice in the field. Knowledge is only one factor that drives actual
behavior. Textbook knowledge also differs from practice wisdom and
clinical judgments. Answers must be based upon content studied from
this guide and what was learned in the classroom. Question are written to
make sure that all social workers provide uniform responses. Answers
cannot depend on individualized practice experiences or diverse agency
protocols and policies.
When viewing questions, ask “What did I study in the guide that
relates to this question?” or “Which KSA is being tested and what do I
know about this content area?” Avoid inappropriately asking, “What would
I do in this instance?” or “How should I handle this situation?” as these
questions lead to picking response choices that draw upon practice
experience, which varies across test-takers, rather than the existing
knowledge base in a given area.
There is only one correct answer for each question. Since everyone
has different practice experience, basing answers on what is seen or
52
done in the field can lead to many different approaches which does not
work when taking standardized tests. However, the knowledge base of
the profession, as taught in social work programs, is universal, regardless
of setting or practice experience. Basing responses on information that is
taught in the classroom and outlined in social work textbooks ensures
getting consistent answers with others–even if there are factors that make
it impossible to implement them in certain work settings.
REMEMBERING IMPORTANT QUESTION FEATURES
The importance of social justice and macro practice is paramount.
The ASWB examinations assess social work knowledge, which
emphasizes the importance of three practice methods–micro, mezzo
(also known as meso), and macro. Even when doing clinical work, social
workers differ in their intervention from others doing counseling or therapy
as they recognize that many problems stem from the larger
20
environment, including marginalization and oppression. Social workers
are mandated to address the root causes of these systemic issues, rather
than blaming those impacted by them. All social workers, even those
specializing in clinical or micro practice methods, have these
responsibilities. Thus, scenarios on the examinations that appear to be
testing direct practice with individuals can actually be situations in which
social workers must change policies or advocate for clients’ rights in order
to address issues causing distress such as discrimination and lack of
adequate services.
Often test takers preparing for the examinations question whether
administration/
management or policy practice will be tested. Of course! Mezzo and
macro social work practice are equally as important as micro practice. All
ASWB exams are going to include questions aimed at ensuring social
workers are change agents and fight for social justice. The profession is
rooted in serving those who are poor and disenfranchised.
A strong commitment to reform can be seen in questions that involve
agency policies as well. For example, supervisors are there to ensure that
clients receive the most effective and efficient services possible–not to
make things easier for social workers or enforce agency mandates.
53
It is essential to make sure the root causes of problems are
addressed. There may be barriers to properly serving clients. Social
workers must look at response choices through the lens of what is best
for clients. The self-determination of clients must only be limited in
situations that could harm clients or others. The correct answers are
always the ones that put clients first.
Questions often focus on conflicts between meeting clients’ needs
versus adhering to practices or policies created by agencies. When there
is a barrier to meeting clients’ needs, social workers must take
responsibility for trying to remove the barriers. Social workers must fight
to change rules which do not maximize client functioning. Having clients
comply is blaming victims and not getting at the root causes of issues.
Answers which reflect these changes are correct even when such
changes seem unrealistic and lengthy. Whether or not social workers are
successful does not change the mandate to challenge unjust practices.
Response choices should not be dismissed just because they seem too
difficult to achieve. If test takers do not challenge injustice through policy
practice on their examinations, it is likely that they have answered
incorrectly!
Do not get distracted by settings or scenarios.
Although there are some questions that require simple “recall” of content,
many ask for the “application” of information to particular situations or
scenarios. These questions come in the form of vignettes and are often
the ones in which social workers make mistakes. In practice, social
workers often alter their actions based on many contextual variables.
However, remember that the questions on the examination are about the
application of social work knowledge within the KSAs, and this knowledge
does not change regardless of the setting in the vignette. In addition, any
of the KSAs can be implemented in a wide variety of settings. Thus, it is
important not to get “lost” in the scenario.
For example, the core components of a discharge plan are the same if it
is prepared for a client leaving the hospital, a drug treatment facility, or an
inpatient psychiatric treatment setting. The content (i.e.,
history/assessment, treatment provided, follow-up needed) may be
different, but each discharge plan must contain information in these
critical areas. Thus, it is essential to stay focused on the content being
tested and remember that it is not necessary to have worked in the
21
settings mentioned in the vignettes (schools, hospitals, drug treatment
54
centers, nursing homes, etc.) to pass the examination; the KSAs or core
social work content being tested is universal, regardless of venue.
Test takers often relate scenarios to the type of social work services
that they have provided in the past or in their practice settings. Unless
specified, social workers in scenarios could be providing a wide variety of
interventions including, but not limited to, information and referral, case
management, advocacy, skills training, and so on. Psychotherapeutic
counseling is just one of many treatments delivered by social workers.
Most scenarios are applicable to any social worker in any practice
situation delivering any service as they are testing important professional
content that are applied generally.
Lastly, when answering questions which involve scenarios, it is critical
that response choices selected relate to the KSAs and are not just
focused on “fixing” the situations. Often there are one or two response
choices that may be helpful to clients in the specific circumstances
described, but do not represent important social work concepts that can
be applied universally to other situations or scenarios. The exam does not
aim to test what social workers do in every instance, but rather
knowledge that must be applied more broadly. Make sure to see the
forest through the trees by not narrowly focusing on the specific client
situation and missing the important broader intent of the question.
Client feelings and behaviors should not be pathologized as they
may be typical reactions.
Social workers often view licensure examinations as a means to assess
their clinical knowledge. They view all client behaviors through a
psychotherapeutic lens and are inappropriately quick to attribute client
feelings and behaviors to symptomology of disorders or dysfunction.
Using this approach, social workers are apt to wrongly view clinical
attributes as the focus of treatment or intervention.
For example, if clients have experienced unsuccessful infertility
treatments, they are likely to feel depressed, frustrated, and hopeless.
These are typical reactions which may result from not achieving desired
results from medical interventions. The presence of these feelings does
not mean that they must be the focus of social work treatment or clinically
analyzed and diagnosed. Perhaps such clients simply need support for
pursuing alternative methods for becoming parents, such as through
adoption or surrogacy.
55
Examination questions often focus on making sure test takers do not
diagnose clients with disorders unless all required clinical criteria are
present. Feelings and emotions can be appropriate manifestations of
underlying problems. Interventions or treatments must aim to address the
underlying root causes of issues, not their symptoms. Anxiety, sadness,
and anger are typical feelings and do not need to be addressed unless
they are causing problems for clients or interfering with functioning. The
mention of client emotions in questions does not mean that they are the
foci of treatment or even problems.
ASWB examinations, including those focused on clinical methods, are
taken by social workers employed in all types of settings and roles.
Clinical work is not restricted to the provision of psychotherapy, but also
includes case management and even advocacy. Most questions on the
ASWB examinations are not focused on psychopathology, but instead
test the broad and diverse knowledge base used by those in the
profession. There are many appropriate interventions to address client
problems, not just counseling. It is important not to solely focus on the
treatment of client emotions as the goal of services.
There are no specific state or jurisdictional laws that should
influence response selections.
The ASWB exams are used in every U.S. state, as well as the District
22
of Columbia, the U.S. Virgin Islands, and several Canadian provinces.
Correct answers are the same for all social workers taking the
examinations. However, the systems of care and laws in each
state/jurisdiction differ; thus, responses to situations may be varied in
real-life, everyday work. This is not the case on the licensing tests, as
there is only one correct answer to each question. Thus, it is essential not
to consider “rules” or laws that apply or resources that may be available
in only one state/jurisdiction.
A simple way to avoid unconsciously using state/jurisdiction-specific
information when answering questions is to think of a different
state/jurisdiction and ask, “What would a social worker living in [insert
name of another state/jurisdiction here] pick as the correct answer?” If the
answer is, “I don’t know because I am not sure how things are done
there,” the response choice is mistakenly being selected based on
practice systems and rules that may differ between states/jurisdictions
and not universal social work content that is always applicable. If the
answer chosen is the same regardless of state/jurisdiction, the selection
56
is based on core social work content that is essential to know.
Professional ethical standards apply regardless of state/jurisdiction so
using them to help identify correct answers can be very helpful.
The hierarchy of clients’ needs must be respected, with safety
prioritized.
Questions on the examinations often require social workers to order their
actions with clients or identify issues or problems that are most important
in given scenarios. In practice, such decisions are often somewhat
subjective and driven by practice wisdom that accounts for many clinical
and contextual factors. However, on the examination, all social workers
must select the same correct answers. A useful framework for prioritizing
client needs and addressing them sequentially is Maslow’s hierarchy of
needs.
Although it is unlikely that Maslow’s hierarchy of needs would ever be
explicitly asked about on the examination, it is a tool that can be used
repeatedly to help prioritize problems or order actions based on client
need. Social workers must always address health and safety issues
before moving on to those that relate to psychological functioning such as
self-esteem. Thus, when questions include response choices that screen
for or attend to the health and safety of clients, test takers must examine
them carefully to see if there is explicit wording that indicates clients are
in danger or at risk of harming others. If so, this concern must be
addressed before other actions are taken.
Social workers must also provide concrete services to meet basic
needs, such as housing, employment, and transportation, before moving
up the hierarchy. Social workers often must drive and accompany clients
to doctor’s appointments or food shopping to ensure that they receive
needed care and have access to fundamental resources. Maslow’s
framework indicates that without health, safety, and basic needs being
met first, clients cannot meet their higher-level needs.
Steps in processes must not be skipped because they take too long
or will not “solve” problems.
Most questions do not ask test takers to “solve” problems or even take
actions that directly lead to resolving issues or situations. For example, a
question may ask what a social worker should do FIRST when having an
issue with a colleague. Although speaking directly to the colleague
23
57
may not seem as expedient as going to a supervisor, it is appropriate to
address the issue with the colleague before going up the chain of
command. In addition, putting requests in writing after not getting
responses to phone calls are also needed to ensure proper
documentation. In practice, social workers often have deadlines and need
to act quickly, requiring skipping of critical steps in processes. However,
these pressures do not exist in test scenarios.
There are not long waiting lists, scarce resources, or delays in
referrals that exist in scenarios unless they are explicitly stated. In actual
practice, social workers encounter these realities daily and often base
their decisions and actions to ensure results despite these constraints.
These factors must not influence selecting a response choice unless they
are explicitly stated in the question.
Often knowledge about the processes themselves are being
assessed, rather than the outcomes. Unless there is a compelling reason,
such as safety, which is explicitly stated in scenarios, test takers should
adhere to the sequencing in established protocols, such as chains of
command or documentation procedures. Actions can be taken
immediately after one another so skipping any of them is not needed.
Desired results will eventually be achieved, even when all steps in
processes are respected.
Determining phases of the problem-solving process within
scenarios is critical.
Another critical tool to assist with selecting the correct answer is the
problem-solving process (i.e., engagement, assessment, planning,
intervention, evaluation, and termination). Understanding the goal of each
phase and the tasks to be completed therein is critical because many
questions on the examination focus on making sure that things are
happening in the correct order.
For example, if questions are about first meetings with clients, the
activities of social workers must focus on engagement. Engagement
includes finding out why clients are there and why they are seeking
services now, explaining the role of social workers and what to expect in
treatment, listening to clients as they explain their situations, and
explaining the limits of confidentiality. Including references to specific
meetings or activities completed are clues for determining what phase of
the problem-solving process social workers and clients are in and what
activities are appropriate next.
58
Actions by social workers are quite different in engagement than they
are in termination. Although questions rarely explicitly state the phase, it
can be identified by what has occurred, such as “when gathering
information on the problem” to indicate assessment or “when developing
the contract” to indicate planning. Also, it may be useful to classify
answers into the phases in which they would occur in order to select what
comes FIRST or NEXT.
Focusing on Question Formatting and Wording
In addition to using the best approach and remembering important
question features, it is necessary to make sure to attend to question
formatting and wording. Missing critical words in questions results in
making avoidable mistakes. There are some basic, but essential, tips that
heighten awareness and must be used to make sure that the most salient
wording in questions is considered and key words are not missed. The
24
following questions help guide critical analysis of test questions to
improve performance and avoid common errors.
Q: Is there a qualifying word in the question?
Many questions contain key words that are extremely important and
distinguish the correct answer from the incorrect response choices.
These words are capitalized, and bolded. In addition, they can usually be
seen near the end of questions. Examples of qualifying words are BEST,
NEXT, MOST, and FIRST. Whenever a qualifying word is contained in a
question, it is the key to selecting the correct answer from the incorrect
responses and is directly related to the concept being assessed. Put the
qualifying word in front of each response choice when reading it to ensure
that the focus on this key word is maintained. Repeat the qualifying word
before reading each response choice. By inserting the qualifying word
before each response choice, you are less likely to get distracted by
words that may not be salient. Qualifying words, when present, are the
most important factors to consider when selecting between the response
choices provided.
Q: Is demographic information about the client mentioned in the
question?
If the ages of clients are included in the vignette, they must be considered
as age often provides relevant information for selecting correct response
59
choices. For example, having imaginary friends at age 4 is very different
than having them at age 34. Imaginary friends in childhood are an
extension of pretend play and part of Piaget’s preoperational stage.
However, having them in later life can be an indicator of psychosis
resulting from a hallucination or delusion. Thus, in the former instance,
this behavior is typical, which would require no special intervention,
whereas in the latter, it is necessary to do a mental status examination or
refer for psychiatric evaluation. Additionally, confidentiality and consent
are handled differently for young children, as compared with adults. If
questions refer to clients generally, answers are not age dependent.
When studying, social workers do not need to memorize the exact
ages at which individuals leave one stage of development or reach
another. However, when mentioned in questions, age can be useful to
indicate where clients are in the life course and what may be expected.
Questions may also contain other important demographic information
such as race/ethnicity, religious affiliation, sexual orientation, gender
identity, etc. There is always a reason that this information was included
in the question so it must be considered when discerning between
response choices.
Q: Is this question testing the application of a specific theory,
perspective, or practice model?
The ASWB examinations require basic knowledge about many theories,
practice models, and perspectives related to social work practice.
Whether on the undergraduate or graduate level, social workers take
courses on theory and practice, learning different models of intervention.
A theory is a set of interrelated concepts that are organized in a way that
explains aspects of everyday life. A practice model is a way in which a
theory is operationalized. And a perspective is a point of view that is
usually broader and at a higher level of abstraction (i.e., strengths
perspective). Having a basic understanding of various theories, practice
models, and perspectives, as well as the terms that are rooted in them, is
necessary.
Sometimes there are recall questions about theories, practice models,
25
or perspectives, but knowledge in these areas is often tested through
application to vignettes. For example, the last sentence before the
response choices may state, “Using a systems approach, a social worker
can expect this recent medical diagnosis to …” Examining the response
choices through the “lens” of systems theory is essential to selecting the
60
correct answer. Systems theory states that individuals are in continual
interaction with their environment and that parts within a system are
interrelated. Thus, when one subsystem is affected, they are all affected.
Having this knowledge is essential as the correct answer must reflect the
medical diagnosis affects others in the family or aspects of the client’s life
beyond health.
It is not necessary to be an expert in all theories, practice models, or
perspectives. Instead, knowledge must be “an inch deep, but a mile wide”
with test takers knowing multiple theories, practice models, or
perspectives–not just the ones that they use in their daily work. The ones
that need to be applied to scenarios may not even be best practices for
the problems presented. Questions requiring application of theories,
practice models, or perspectives are not asking for test takers to pick the
modalities to be used, but instead which response choices represent the
theories, practice models, or perspectives chosen by the question writers.
When studying, it is good to know the focus of each modality–for
example, understanding the fundamental difference between structural
and strategic family therapies. In addition, questions often contain terms
or techniques associated with various interventions, even when the
names of the treatment approaches are not mentioned. Sometimes
questions do not specify paradigms but use related terms that would only
be known if they were studied.
When examining questions, make sure to determine whether
questions require the use of particular theories, practice models, or
perspectives. If so, the answers must directly relate to these approaches,
whether or not they are the best means to address the problems.
Q: Are conclusions about scenarios supported by explicit wording?
Perhaps the biggest mistake that social workers make when reading
vignettes is adding material to these questions. This is done
unconsciously when social workers mistakenly think of clients or
situations in their own practices that are similar to those described in the
question. Social workers often view scenarios through a “micro practice
lens,” as most social workers work directly with individuals and families.
However, a client in a scenario does not need to be an individual. It can
be a family, organization, group, or community so an assumption should
not be made that the term “client” refers to a single individual.
Unfortunately, as social workers are in the field longer, they are more
likely to make this mistake as there are more instances in which
61
scenarios resemble their own practice experiences. For example, if
clients are described as psychotic or threatening, they may be
inappropriately judged as a danger to themselves or others because of
social workers’ past experiences with clients who were such. However,
being psychotic or threatening does not necessarily imply danger. Clients
can be threatening, but verbalizations could focus on not paying bills or
refusing to continue with services. Threats do not necessarily involve
physical harm unless it is explicitly stated in the vignettes.
To determine whether material is added to questions, ask what social
workers doing macro practice might do as often the material that is added
to questions involves clinical content. Social workers doing micro, mezzo,
and macro social work draw from the same theoretical base and rely
26
on the same professional knowledge. Social workers must be able to
competently apply all three practice methods in their work. Often when
asking whether a social worker in a scenario could be providing macro
services, test takers see the situation in a new light as many vignettes do
not specify the practice method used. Social workers tend to assume that
micro-level or clinical services were being delivered, but these are implicit
biases. It is essential to recognize that all test takers tend to read and
interpret questions based upon their own practice experiences. These
experiences mean that information gets unconsciously added. It is always
advisable to reread questions to ensure that conclusions are supported
by empirical evidence and not just assumptions which are not sustained
by question wording.
Q: Are there quotation marks in the questions or response choices?
Some questions include words or phrases in quotation marks that directly
relate to identifying the KSAs and/or getting the correct answers. For
example, a vignette may describe a client who walks into the first therapy
session and states, “I don’t have to tell you anything and I don’t want to
be here,” followed by a question asking about a social worker’s BEST
response. Although this question does not explicitly state that it is asking
how to best address resistance, it is doing so as evidenced by the client’s
statement. Words in quotation marks are there for a reason and usually
have information that is essential for selecting correct answers.
Quotation marks can also be in response choices. Sometimes entire
response choices are quoted statements, such as those which represent
social workers’ most appropriate reactions to clients’ concerns or
62
behaviors in scenarios. Test takers must evaluate words or phrases in
answers with the same diligence that they do so in questions.
Q: Do response choices begin with verbs that can provide some
assistance?
Many of the response choices to questions on the examination begin with
verbs. The verbs can provide valuable assistance, especially if you are
debating between multiple response choices. For example, some
response choices describe social workers taking action (“tell” or
“arrange”) without mentioning any roles for clients. These response
choices do not use an empowerment approach, which may help rule
them out.
“Explore” and “engage” are verbs that usually indicate that social
workers are working with clients to arrive at solutions. “Ignore” or “wait”
may indicate that social workers are not helping clients address critical
problems when needed.
Verbs can also be associated with phases of the problem-solving
process. “Assure” is often associated with engagement, while “assess,”
“ask,” and “determine” best describe assessment. If actions are supposed
to occur at certain phases of the helping process, verbs must be
examined to see if they are consistent with the requisite phase. In
addition, test takers are often asked to order actions of social workers. If
response choices represent different actions, examining the verbs to
assist with ordering is helpful. “Acknowledge” is usually done before
“explore” or “explain.”
Examining verbs which begin response choices is a helpful tool to use
when two or more response choices appear equally viable. As not all
response choices begin with verbs, it can only be used for some question
formats. However, close attention must be paid to verb choice in some
instances as it provides a concise way to determine if an action by a
social worker is appropriate given material in the question, as well as
where it is to occur within the problem-solving process.
Q: Does the answer explicitly or implicitly involve the client?
Social workers view clients as experts on their own situations and they
27
should be regarded as such. Often response choices on the
examinations are not correct as they only mention social workers acting
and do not involve collaboration with clients. Even when actions may
63
seem appropriate, they may be incorrect as they do not mention roles for
the client. Test takers must view response choices carefully, asking
whether clients are mentioned explicitly or implicitly. Response choices
based on social workers making decisions about tasks in the problem-
solving process, such as appropriate interventions, are not as good as
those that base these decisions on discussions with clients. Even when
social workers have sound advice or can take actions to assist clients,
these answers are not preferred over those which mention working with
clients to determine the reasons for the problems or intervene. The
involvement of the client is often a crucial factor in answer selection.
Q: Is a response choice being selected solely because it contains
social work jargon or buzz words?
ASWB examinations aim to determine whether social workers really
understand the concepts being tested or are just selecting response
choices because they sound correct or have answers that have social
work “buzz words” such as “rapport,” “empathy,” “support system,”
“joining with a client,” “strengths perspective,” “from a client’s
perspective,” and so on. Often, social workers have a hard time
eliminating response choices that contain jargon that is important to
effective practice. These are key concepts that are the cornerstone of
competent social work services. However, a word or catch phrase does
not make a response choice correct. A response choice may not be
correct because the other parts of it are inadequate, false, or simply do
not address the problem needing attention.
When seeing social work “buzz words” in response choices, it is
essential to read the response choices critically. Perhaps they will not be
as appealing if synonyms for these “buzz words” are used in their place.
Often incorrect response choices are made more appealing by adding
social work jargon to see if test takers will be lured by their inclusion.
Most of the time jargon is in the incorrect response choices, serving as
distractors. Test takers should not be influenced by the inclusion of fancy
social work terms in response choices and need to select response
choices based on their substantive merits, ensuring that they directly
relate to the assessment of the chosen KSAs.
Q: Has the question format been examined and broken down into its
requisite components?
64
On the ASWB examinations, social workers often struggle with
application and reasoning questions that require them to take what has
been learned and use it to identify correct answers given hypothetical
contexts. These items require test takers are frustrated as they do not
know what is being asked in questions and how to choose between
response choices which seem similar. Becoming more familiar with the
construction of multiple-choice tests, as well as remembering concepts
that are hallmarks within the social work profession, can greatly assist.
Many social workers do not have experience taking multiple-choice
tests and are ­ unfamiliar with the format of questions. Application and
reasoning questions are like funnels with several important parts.
Background–Often a question starts with background information
28
such as why the client is receiving services, what type of services are
being received, and/or demographic information about the client (such as
age, gender identity, religion, sexual orientation, or other relevant data).
The background, if present, is typically the first sentence of the question.
If no background information is provided then it is not relevant to
addressing the presenting problem or answering the question correctly.
Presenting Problem or Issue–Most questions ask test-takers to
evaluate a variety of responses or actions to appropriately address
identified concerns. Presenting problems can be briefly described in a
sentence or two but are sometimes lengthier, such as in reasoning
questions that are assessed using vignettes or scenarios. If there is
background information provided in the question, the presenting problem
or issue is described in the sentence or sentences between the
background and the last sentence before the response choices. If there is
no background information provided, the question begins with the
problem or issue which commences with the last sentence before the
response choice.
Question Stem–The last sentence or portion of a sentence before
the response choices helps the test-taker understand the focus or intent
of the question. The question stem often includes qualifying words or the
lens that needs to be considered when evaluating the response choices,
such as “using a task centered approach” or “a social justice perspective.”
This last sentence or question stem is often very specific and points the
test taker in the correct direction, establishing the criterion to be used
when evaluating the response choices.
The following example identifies the key components of a question.
65
Q: Has the question been read or referred to more than once to
distinguish the correct answer (known as the key) from the incorrect
response choices (known as distractors)?
A key is the correct answer to the question which is based on content
learned in social work educational programs. The ASWB tests assess
knowledge so the key is superior to the alternatives based on conceptual
information that was learned in school that is not contained in the other
response choices.
Distractors are plausible, but incorrect response choices to a question.
Rarely will response choices appear that can be easily eliminated. ASWB
does not use “all of the above” or “none of the above” response choices.
Distractors are similar in length and language to the keys or correct
answer. Often distractors represent common mistakes made by social
workers. Test takers often inappropriately select incorrect response
29
choices or distractors as they feel that they incorporate or overlap
correct ones. Each response choice must be assessed based on the
explicit wording used and social workers must not assume redundancy
between them.
Often selecting the correct answer requires rereading or referring
back to the question. A good strategy is eliminating incorrect response
choices in an iterative process. After eliminating the first incorrect
response choice, a test taker should reread the question so its intent is
clear before selecting the correct answer from the remaining alternate
choice.
These are principles that must be considered when distinguishing the
key from distractors. While not exhaustive, these themes are consistent
across questions and can be used to assist with identifying correct
answers. However, the degree to which each is relevant to a particular
question varies. A question to help with test-taking is listed after each
relevant concept.
■ Social workers have groups, organizations, and communities
66
clients.
● Does the question specifically identify an individual or family as
client or could the level of intervention be bigger (the client is a gr
an organization, and/or a community)?
■ Social workers do all types of intervention including provision
concrete services, case management, policy practice, and commun
organization.
● Does the question explicitly state the type of service being provide
not, the KSA is universal across intervention types
■ Social workers respect client self-determination.
● Are any of the response choices more respectful of the client’s rig
make decisions?
■ Social workers are trained to identify the root causes of problems.
● Do any of the response choices address the underlying system
issues rather than just those impacted?
■ Social workers engage collaboratively with clients.
● Do any of the response choices mention the client implicitly or expl
as opposed to just the social worker?
■ Social workers use a systems approach to understanding functioning
● Do any of the response choices consider the interplay betw
biopsychosocial-cultural-spiritual functioning or the micro, mezzo,
macro levels of intervention?
■ Social workers apply their knowledge in diverse settings and w
many populations.
● Do any of the response choices reflect knowledge that can
generalized to all agencies, methods of practice, and client groups
■ Social workers are committed to social justice and working with tho
who are oppressed.
67
●
Do any of the response choices ensure equal rights, especially
for those who are poor and/or marginalized?
30
68
Section II
Content and Practice
Test for the ASWB
Clinical Examination
32
69
31
Self-Assessment
There is a separate content outline for each of the four ASWB
33
examinations (Bachelors, Masters, Clinical, and Advanced
Generalist). However, there is tremendous overlap in content across
these tests. Sometimes a KSA is not listed in the same content area
or is described slightly differently (e.g., “theories of human
development” versus “developmental theories”). However, the
knowledge needed to competently answer questions in this area is
the same.
The good news is that doing well on one ASWB examination
often means performing well on another. It is always easier to
remember material that has been already learned than to learn it for
the first time!
It is very helpful to review the content outline to concentrate
studying in areas in which more preparation is needed. Many of
these topics look familiar as they are the basis of social work
educational programs. Topics in which basic content and/or key
terms cannot be remembered or recalled must be foci for studying
and indicated by circling “1.” If some basic information and/or key
terms is known about topics, there may be a need to fill in some
gaps and “2” must be circled. Lastly, if all key concepts and terms of
the topics, as well as their applicability to social work practice and
impacts on client functioning, can be summarized, no additional
preparation is needed and “3” can be circled. Adequate preparation
means synthesizing material from multiple content areas and
discussing all aspects of the KSAs easily and fluidly.
70
71
72
34
73
35
74
36
75
37
76
77
38
78
39
79
40
80
41
81
42
82
Key Social Work Terms
SOME IMPORTANT SOCIAL WORK TERMS
43
In addition to terms defined in other parts of this study guide, these
300 words or concepts are important for social workers to know as
they relate to one or more of the content areas on the social work
licensing exam. Studying words that may be unfamiliar will help with
performance on recall or application questions. These words could
also appear in reasoning questions that contain scenarios or
vignettes. Sometimes the actual terms do not appear, but questions
ask about key concepts that are related to these terms.
aberrant: markedly different from an accepted norm; deviant,
atypical or nonconforming
abstinence: practice of not doing something; often used to
describe an activity which may be enjoyable such as drinking alcohol
or engaging in sexual activity
act of commission: engaging in an act of malfeasance when
knowing the action or omission is illegal
act of omission: failure to perform a legal duty; social work task
that is not done despite the need to do so according to established
standard of care
acuity: sharpness or ability, particularly of the mind, vision, or
hearing
83
acute: short or episodic; often characterized by high intensity and
unanticipated (sudden onset); not chronic
ad hoc: created or done for a particular needed purpose; occurs
temporarily to fulfil a given need
advance directive: written statement of wishes regarding
medical treatment to ensure those wishes are honored in the event
that they cannot be communicated to doctors; types of advance
directives, include, but are not limited to, living wills, medical powers
of attorney and do-not-resuscitate (DNR) orders
adverse event: a harmful or negative occurrence which is often
unanticipated; sometimes resulting from a medication or other
intervention, such as surgery
age of consent: legal age at which a minor can legally engage in
a behavior without parental consent; varies by jurisdiction and type
of activity; minors are granted right to confidentiality if they are over
the age of consent as they are regarded in same manner as adults
agranulocytosis: decline in the number of white blood cells,
44
typically due to a medication reaction; can be caused by clozapine
and certain antipsychotics
altruistic: genuinely interested in or committed to the well-being of
others
amelioration: aimed at improving or making better; lessoning of
symptoms or severity of disease, illness, or disorder; eradicating a
social problem
antecedents: things or events that existed before or logically
precede others; often identified as causes of maladaptive behaviors
84
antianxiety medication: drug used to reduce or alleviate
symptoms of anxiety disorders; known as anxiolytics or tranquilizers,
work by targeting certain neurotransmitters in the brain to promote
relaxation, reduce excessive worry, and alleviate feelings of anxiety
antidepressant medication: drug used to treat depression by
targeting neurotransmitters in the brain, such as serotonin,
norepinephrine, or dopamine
antipsychotic medication: drug used to manage symptoms of
psychosis, such as hallucinations, delusions, and disorganized
thinking
antisocial behavior: actions that deviates from social norms and
violates the rights of others such as crime, delinquency, and
aggression
apathy: lack of interest, motivation, or emotion; often seen in
conditions like depression
assent: agreement or approval by someone not able to give legal
consent due to age or cognitive ability
assisted suicide: life-ending actions done with the help of others,
especially the taking of lethal drugs provided by doctors to those with
terminal illnesses or incurable conditions
attachment theory: psychological framework that explores the
emotional bonds and connections individuals form with primary
caregivers in early childhood and their impact on development
atrophy: decreasing in size and function; shrinkage of muscle or
nerve tissue; can be caused by aging, inactivity, malnutrition, and
other injuries, illnesses, and conditions
85
authoritarian parenting: children expected to follow strict rules
established by the parents; failure to do results in punishment
authoritative parenting: caregivers establish rules and
guidelines that children are expected to follow; more democratic than
authoritarian as nurturing and forgiving if rules are not followed
aversion therapy: behavior therapy designed to make clients
give up undesirable habits by causing them to associate these habits
with unpleasant effects
avolition: total lack of motivation that makes it hard to get anything
done
barbiturates: group of drugs known as sedative-hypnotics;
derived from barbituric acid; addictive and life-threatening withdrawal
symptoms; declining use in recent years
bartering: acceptance of services, goods or other non-monetary
payments from clients in return for services; creates the potential for
conflicts of interest, exploitation, and inappropriate boundaries in
social workers’ relationships with clients; only permissible in very
limited cultural contexts
beneficence: to act for the benefit of others; moral obligation of
45
helping professionals to do no harm and act in the best interest of
others
benign: not damaging or threatening to life; often used to describe
growths that are not cancerous
benzodiazepines: drugs that depress central nervous system
activity and relax muscles; used in the treatment of generalized
anxiety, panic disorder, and insomnia; can help with withdrawal from
alcohol; replaced the use of barbiturates due to fewer risks
associated with overdose
86
bereavement: period of mourning or grief; often occurs after the
death of a family member or close friend
biofeedback: techniques to psychologically lower physiological
processes such as heart rate, muscle tension, and blood pressure;
used for tension relief
biopsychosocial assessment: integrated evaluation that
considers biological, psychological, and social factors to understand
health and well-being
boundary crossing: intentionally or unintentionally deviating from
established professional standards dictated by professional
relationships; harmless, non-exploitative
boundary violation: harmful or potentially harmful deviation from
established professional standards dictated by professional
relationships; often involves exploitation
broker: social work role that focuses on identification of, location of,
and linkage to community resources
callous: showing no emotion toward or concern for others; lacking
empathy for the feelings or experiences of others
capitation: payment structure used with insurance companies;
provider or facility is paid a fixed amount for each person; risk is
taken by entity to deliver services under cost of contract; incentive to
provider or facility to promote wellness
case advocacy: mediating, negotiating and navigating systems
on behalf of and in collaboration with an individual or family in need
of change
catastrophizing: assuming the worse when faced with the
unknown; can lead to excessive worry or increased anxiety
87
catalyst: social work role that focuses on promoting change to
eradicate inequities or promote social justice; achieved through
developing humane service delivery, advocating for just social and
environmental policy, and supporting a worldview that acknowledges
global interdependence
catatonia: disturbance of motor functioning which can include
muscular rigidity or adoption of bizarre postures; associated with
some psychological disorders; commonly referred to as “catatonic
state”
catharsis: the release of repressed emotions due to trauma that
are brought back into consciousness; expression of strong emotions
which have been “pent up”; needed for healing
cause advocacy: working to change how organizations and
institutions operate, as well as how they affect governmental policy
decisions and guidelines; often called class advocacy
chaining: operant conditioning technique to learn complex tasks
46
by reinforcing steps in a series; forward chaining involves reinforcing
first step until it is learned and then doing same for next step until
entire task is learned
chronic: long standing; persisting for a long time or reoccurring;
continual
cisgender: having gender identity that corresponds to the gender
roles for one’s birth sex
civil commitment: court-ordered hospitalization or
institutionalization due to danger to self or others; also called
“involuntary commitment” or “involuntary hospitalization”
client-centered therapy: self-discovery and actualization occur
in response to consistent empathic understanding of and respect for
88
views; growth results from reflection and clarification that includes
resolving conflicts, reorganizing values and approaches to life, and
learning how to interpret thoughts and feelings
client self-monitoring: form of data-gathering in which clients
are asked to systematically observe and record specific targets such
as their own thoughts, emotions, body feelings, and behaviors; often
used in cognitive behavioral therapy
close-ended questioning: soliciting information which requires
choice from a limited number of options (such as yes/no); used to
structure assessment; beneficial when time is limited or specific
information required
codependency: being emotionally reliant on another; used to
describe two people who are emotionally dependent on one another;
used to describe a dysfunctional relationship in which one person
engages in behaviors that enable dysfunction by another
cognitive dissonance: holding two beliefs, values, or attitudes
that contradict each other; can cause mental discomfort and
psychological stress
cognitive distortions: inaccurate, irrational views of reality
which may serve to assist with coping from adverse events;
unhealthy thoughts which are often addressed in cognitive
behavioral therapy
cognitive restructuring: therapeutic process of assisting clients
to see errors in thinking and self-defeating beliefs so that they can be
replaced with more positive and productive thought patterns
collateral contact: a third party who has firsthand knowledge
client’s circumstances and can be used to verify or supplement
information
89
collateral information: records or documents associated with
the client that are used in the problem-solving process; may be used
to corroborate information provided by the client
color blindness: disregard of racial differences and structural
inequities within institutions
comorbidity: occurring at the same time, such as having a
psychological and medical problem simultaneously; often referred to
as co-occurring
compassion fatigue: stress resulting from working with those
who have experienced trauma; symptoms include apathy, feeling
overwhelmed, exhaustion, pessimism, and feeling powerlessness;
sometimes referred to as the “cost of caring”
complementarity: supplementing or enhancing the qualities of
47
another; a balance within a relationship due to feeling that another
compliments or adds to the union
complementary medicine: encompasses treatments that fall
outside of the scope of scientific medicine, but can be used as an
ancillary interventions; examples include acupuncture, massage,
chiropractic, and osteopathy (manipulation and massage of the
joints, bones, and muscles)
compulsion: behavior that must be performed to avoid distressing
situations or adverse outcomes; behavior for which person is driven
or compelled to prevent psychic stress or distress
compulsory: required or mandated; must be done due to rule or
law
confabulation: unconsciously compensating for gaps in memory
by making up stories or details; causes include memory disorders,
injuries, and mental health disorders
90
confirmation bias: tendency to select information that confirms
existing beliefs; impacts gathering and recalling of information
conflict resolution: informal or formal process that two or more
parties use to find an acceptable solution to a dispute or
disagreement
confrontation: therapeutic technique of calling attention to
distorted thinking, behavioral patterns, or ineffective communication
so that it can be addressed
congenital: medical or physical characteristic present since birth;
also used to describe a habit that is firmly established such as lying
congruent communication: verbal and nonverbal language
and actions provide consistent messages; important for intimacy and
emotional connection
conjoint therapy: partners in a relationship or members of a
family are treated together in joint sessions, instead of being treated
separately; also called conjoint counseling
consent: legal permission for something to happen or agreement
to do something; cannot be obtained from those not legally
authorized to make decisions
consultation: usually time-limited work or guidance provided due
to specialized expertise; advice does not have to be followed (non-
binding)
continuity of care: ensuring that there are no gaps or duplication
in service; often a focus when moving from one provider to another,
or being discharged from a hospital or other inpatient setting
continuum of care: range of services geared to address varying
levels of need from most to least severe; needed to appropriately
91
address problems as they get better and/or worse
contraindication: reason for a person not to receive a
medication, treatment, or intervention as it not appropriate and/or
could be harmful
convalescence: time spent recovering from an illness, injury, or
other medical condition; often referred to a “recuperation”
conversion therapy: process that aims to change those attracted
to others of the same gender to become solely heterosexual;
considered unethical by NASW, as well as the professional
organizations of psychologists and psychiatrists; supported by some
religious groups; also called “reparative therapy”
cooptation: strategy for reducing resistance by including
48
opponents in decision making; aims to change viewpoints of those
who are oppositional
corroboration: independent evidence that confirms or supports
something
countertransference: emotional reaction of helper which can be
used to identify the reaction of others to the one being assisted;
based on the helper’s own psychological needs which are revealed
through conscious responses; historically seen as a hinderance, but
now viewed as helpful to the therapeutic process
court-appointed examiner: professional sanctioned by the
court to evaluate and generate a report to be used in legal
proceedings; must report all relevant information back to the court
cultural humility: lifelong commitment to self-reflection, learning,
and respectful engagement with diverse cultures, recognizing the
limitations of one’s own knowledge and experiences
92
cultural pluralism: recognition and accommodation of those
from various racial, religious, ethnic, and other diverse groups;
willingness and commitment to work together despite freedom to
practice own traditions
decompensation: loss of typical functioning; can relate to
coherent thought, emotional regulation, activities of daily living,
and/or cognitive functioning
defense mechanism: mental process, typically unconsciously, to
avoid conscious conflict or anxiety
deleterious: harmful, hazardous, or detrimental
delirious: incoherence of thought or speech; incoherent; also been
used to describe someone who is wildly excited
delirium: disordered thought that can include changes in cognition
(disorientation, memory impairment, or language disturbance),
hallucinations, restlessness, and misinterpretation of sounds or
sights; acute state which develops quickly; can fluctuate over a short
period; multiple etiologies; usually temporary and treatable
delusion: false, fixed belief despite evidence to the contrary;
believing something that is not true
delusion of grandeur: false sense of great ability, knowledge,
worth, and so forth
dementia: general term for loss of memory, language, problem-
solving and other thinking abilities that are severe enough to
interfere with daily life; primarily impacts those over the age of 65;
likelihood of developing dementia significantly increases with age
depersonalization: feeling estranged from oneself and usually
from the external world; often occurs as a result of a traumatic
93
experience; characteristic of some mental disorders
desensitization: gradual reduction in adverse reaction to stimuli
due to exposure or as a result of behavioral techniques aimed at
reducing anxiety or fear
detoxification: process which aims to remove drugs or other
harmful substances from the body; must be closely monitored as can
have life threatening consequences associated with withdrawal
developmental disability: condition occurring before
49
adulthood that results in life-long functional impairment; may be due
to genetic or other disorder present at birth or an accident during
childhood that causes significant difficulties with cognition, mobility,
and/or other functional domains
deviance: actions that are considered inappropriate or a typical;
data that varies significantly from the norm
diagnostic-related groups: classification system that
standardizes payment to hospitals based on the care given to and
resources used by a “typical” patient with similar characteristics and
diagnosis/treatment needs; covers all charges from the time of
inpatient admission to discharge
diagnostic overshadowing: tendency to attribute clients’
symptoms or difficulties solely to their mental health diagnosis,
overlooking other factors or underlying issues
dialectic: uncovering the truth through debate of contradicting
viewpoints; rooted in a type of cognitive behavioral therapy found
effective with suicidal behavior and borderline personality disorder;
therapy using this approach focuses on regulating emotions, being
mindful, and learning to accept pain
94
differential diagnosis: process of distinguishing between
mental, physical, or other problems that result in similar symptoms or
might be causes for behavior
discounting the positive: explaining the positive as luck or an
isolated instance; like mental filtering, but do not overlook the
negative (just choose to minimize its importance)
double bind: contradictory messages or requests in which
affirmatively responding to one negates the other; situation in which
any choice results in unpleasant outcome
dual relationship: having another association with a client, such
as friend, family member, intimate partner, coworker, and so forth;
should be avoided due to boundary violations
dysphoria: general sense of dissatisfaction
dysthymia: persistent depressive disorder; chronic, but mild so
easily treatable
eco-map: graphical representation that shows all of the systems at
play in a client’s life
echolalia: non-voluntary, unsolicited repetition of words or sounds
associated with a mental condition; may also be used to describe
children repeating words or sounds when learning to talk
eclectic therapy: use of multiple clinical approaches in order to
select the best treatment for each individual client
ecological perspective: focuses on the interrelationship
between individuals and their environment; emphasis on the
interactions between people and the larger contexts in which they
exist
95
ego: part of the personality that mediates between the desires of
the id (unconscious instincts) and the constraints of the superego
(internalized rules and values)
egocentric: little to no regard for others’ interests, beliefs, or
attitudes
ego dystonic: thoughts, impulses, or wishes that are repugnant or
unacceptable to one’s sense of self; sometimes referred to as “ego
alien”
ego psychology: emphasizes the capacity for logical thinking
50
in controlling impulses, planning, and dealing with the external
environment
ego syntonic: thoughts, impulses, or wishes that are acceptable
to self as they are compatible with one’s views and ways of thinking
elimination disorder: condition which involves defecation or
urination; usually occurs in children or adults with intellectual
disabilities; not due to the use of substances or medical problems
emancipated minor: youth who has not reached the age of
adulthood (18 in most states) but may claim legal rights as an adult
enabler: social work role which focuses on increasing coping skills
or alleviating stress; conveying hope, reducing resistance, helping to
manage feelings, and partializing problems are central; family role
which focuses on protecting those who are dysfunctional by making
excuses or remedying the consequences of harmful actions
encopresis: passage of feces which is involuntary; may be due to
emotional or psychological problems; often treated with behavioral
intervention; medical causes should be ruled out
96
endogenous depression: depression that cannot be linked to an
external psychological stressor so it is assumed to be caused by a
biological or genetic factor
enmeshed family: members have little to no autonomy or
personal boundaries
entitlement: feeling that special consideration is deserved; right or
benefit of a person or group; benefit program for which one has the
legal right to receive
entropy: degree of chaos, randomness, disorganization, and
disorder in a system or family
enuresis: urination that is involuntary; may be caused by medical
problem, which should first be ruled out, or psychological distress
equifinality: concept that similar outcomes can stem from different
experiences
equilibrium: state of balance or stability
equity: approach to resource allocation in which individuals receive
their fair share of the goods and services in society; distinct from
equality which provides each resources to all as equity sometimes
required treating people differently from others to compensate to lack
of opportunities
ethnocentrism: judging one’s own social, cultural, or racial group
as superior to others; tendency to view and/or judge others’ ethnicity
in light of one’s own
etiology: cause of a behavior, disorder, or disease; root of the
problem
97
euphoria: elevated mood; excessive state not due to external
events can be associated with mania, a characteristic of bipolar
disorder
euthanasia: practice of intentionally ending life to eliminate pain
and suffering; usually distinguished from assisted suicide as action is
done by another
evidence-based practice: use of best scientific knowledge,
based on explanatory studies using experimental designs, to guide
professional interventions
existential therapy: focuses on free will, personal choice, and
51
the search for meaning; aims to enhance self-awareness and
understanding; stresses personal responsibility for existence and
meaning of life
exogenous depression: depression caused by a distressing
event or situation; also called “reactive depression”
expressive communication: ability to communicate thoughts
and feelings through words, gestures, signs, and/or symbols;
communication “output”
extinction: fading and disappearance of behavior that was
previously learned by association with another event; behavior
eventually becomes extinct if reward no longer follows the behavior
external locus of control: belief that outcomes are not under
one’s control, but rather due to environmental factors, luck, chance,
or randomness
external validity: extent to which results are generalizable
expressive therapies: therapeutic approaches that incorporate
creative and expressive mediums, such as art, music, or dance, to
98
promote self-expression, healing, and personal growth
factitious disorder: serious mental disorder in which someone
deceives others by appearing sick (imposed on self), by getting sick
or by self-injury; caregivers can falsely present others, such as
children, as being ill, injured, or impaired (imposed on another);
formerly called Munchausen or Muchausen by proxy syndrome
false memory syndrome: condition in which a person has an
apparent recollection of an event that did not actually occur,
especially one of childhood sexual abuse
false positive: inaccurate test results indicating positive findings
(or presence of a condition) when they are really negative (or
condition is not present)
feasibility study: assessment to determine whether goals,
objectives, or plans are achievable given available resources
feces: excrement (stool) discharged from the intestines
fee splitting: receiving compensation for referrals made to other
professionals; unethical in social work practice
fee-for-service: payment method for services, in which providers
set their own fees, that are paid in part or full by recipients and/or
insurance companies
fetish: object or nonsexual part of the body that causes sexual
excitement; object, idea, or behavior that is the focus of irrational
devotion or excessive attention
fixation: obsessive preoccupation with an idea, impulse, or aim
flashbacks: vivid and intrusive re-experiences of traumatic events,
often associated with post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD)
99
flooding: behavioral technique in which stimuli that cause anxiety
are presented with regularity and intensity so that they no longer
produce the adverse response
folie à deux: identical or similar mental disorder affecting two or
more individuals, usually the members of a close family; while not
restricted to can often involve paranoid delusions
formative evaluation: gathering and analyzing feedback
52
during the development or implementation of a program, project, or
product; often used to help improve processes
formulary: listing of prescription drugs covered by a prescription
drug plan or another insurance plan offering prescription drug
benefits
free association: process used in psychoanalysis which
encourages client to verbalize whatever thoughts come to mind, no
matter how embarrassing, illogical, or irrelevant; allows unconscious
ideas and feelings to be revealed so they can be interpreted
generativity: orientation towards making the world a better place
for others; benevolence; most commonly occurs during middle
adulthood according to Erickson
genogram: diagram illustrating a client’s family members, how they
are related, and their medical history; used to see hereditary patterns
of behavior and medical and psychological factors that are shared or
influential
gestalt therapy: focuses on becoming more aware of and taking
responsibility for one’s own actions, as well as recognizing
distortions in thinking; emphasis on “here and now”; encourages
reenactments and role plays to better understand behavior
100
ghost sickness: nightmares, weakness, loss of appetite, fear,
anxiety, hallucinations, confusion, and so forth that are attributed to
the deceased or supernatural; cultural belief
grandiosity: exaggerated sense of self, importance, or ability; may
be regarded as a delusion of grandeur when extreme
groupthink: when a group of individuals reaches a consensus
without critical evaluation of the consequences or alternatives
guided imagery: using calming mental images to achieve a
relaxed, focused state to manage stress/pain, promote healing, or
enhance performance. also called “visualization”
gustatory hallucinations: tasting something that is not present;
can be of an inedible object, such as metal
hallucination: false sensory perception that is believed to be real
though it is not; most common are auditory and visual; typically a
symptom of a psychotic disorder, but can be caused by substance
use, medical problem, or another condition
health care proxy: document that designates a person to make
health care decisions in situations in which the designee is unable to
do so; differs from living will which identifies what life-saving
measures are desired; both are considered advanced directives
hematuria: presence of blood in a person’s urine; characterized as
“gross” when blood can be easily seen or “micro” when it cannot but
it is visible under a microscope
hero: family role which attempts to draw attention away from the
dysfunction by excelling and performing well
histrionic behavior: manipulative behavior that is dramatic,
demanding, self-indulgent, and attention seeking
101
homeopathy: based on the belief that the body can cure itself
53
through the use of natural substances like plants and minerals; use
of natural elements trigger body’s natural responses; sometimes
referred to as “alternative medicine”
homeostasis: maintenance of a stable balance, evenness, or
symmetry within a system
humanistic psychology: focus on humans as individuals;
concerned with the fullest growth in the areas of love, fulfillment, self-
worth, and autonomy; take issue with deterministic approach which
posits that people’s behavior is predominantly driven by behavioral
stimuli and early childhood experiences
hypochondriasis: abnormal preoccupation with health and a fear
of having or getting a disease despite physical evidence to the
contrary; known as illness anxiety disorder
hypomania: milder version of mania that lasts for a short period
(usually a few days); characterized by elevated mood, enhanced
irritability, higher energy level, being more talkative, and/or feeling
more confident; does not cause significant distress or greatly impair
functioning related to work, family or social life like mania
id: part of the personality that contains the instinctual, biological
drives; most primitive component of the personality; located in the
unconscious; desire for immediate gratification begins in infancy,
until the ego begins to develop
ideas of reference: belief that irrelevant or benign things directly
refer to oneself or have special personal significance; often referred
to as “delusions of reference”
ideation: formation of ideas or beliefs; suicidal ideation requires
social workers to assess for harm
102
identification with the aggressor: survivors of kidnapping,
assault, rape, and so forth develop sympathy for their perpetrators
and may even justify their actions; also called “Stockholm syndrome”
idiopathic: disease or condition that has an uncertain or unknown
origin
illusion: incorrectly perceiving or interpreted; common in people
with schizophrenia
imaginary friend: fictitious person, animal, or other entity with
which one has a friendship or interpersonal relationship; a
companion that is constructed in the psyche; having one in childhood
is developmentally appropriate and not indicator of mental disorder
impaired colleague: coworker whose functioning has
deteriorated because of a physical or mental problem, including
substance use, disability, death of family or friend, burnout/stress,
illness, and so forth; address by bringing to the attention of the
person, when feasible, so accommodations can be made to
eliminate impact on service delivery
impotence: consistent inability to sustain an erection for sexual
intercourse; cause can be erectile dysfunction; can be caused by
emotional factors, but most often due to physical problem
in vivo: conditions that approximate real-life; often used to describe
face-to-face encounters, such as in-vivo supervision
incoherent: unclear; expressed in an incomprehensible or
confusing way; not making sense
insomnia: difficulty falling asleep, staying asleep, or having non-
54
restorative sleep, often associated with various mental health
conditions
103
interdisciplinary: analyzes, synthesizes and harmonizes links
between disciplines into a coordinated and coherent whole; distinct
from multidisciplinary
intermittent reinforcement: when only some responses are
rewarded; operant behavioral technique; difficult to extinguish
behaviors that have been intermittently reinforced
internal locus of control: belief that things that happen are
greatly influenced by own abilities, actions, or mistakes
internal validity: confidence that independent variable causes
the dependent variable (cause-effect)
intersectionality: interconnected nature of social categorizations
such as race, gender, and class; often refers to overlapping systems
of discrimination and disadvantage
involuntary commitment: legal process that results in a person
who is deemed a danger to self or others being confined to a
hospital or facility without consent; length of stay varies depending
on continued presence of dangerous behavior; reevaluation occurs
regularly
learned helplessness: feeling that have no control over a
situation which results in behaving in a dependent or powerless
manner; leads to failure to engage in opportunities to change;
prevents activity or action
least restrictive environment: conditions which have the
fewest controls or those which approximate the settings which would
naturally occur; often with people with disabilities to ensure inclusion
in greater society or avoid segregation in education
lethality: ability to cause death or serious harm
104
lethargy: low energy level and/or lack of motivated behavior; often
associated with depression and other conditions
locus of control: influence over life conditions; external locus of
control regards outcomes as arising from external or situational
factors that cannot be influenced while internal locus of control
regards outcomes as due to one’s own actions and abilities
lost child: family role focused on removing oneself from the
dysfunction; often perceived as the “good” child because time is
spent alone or involved in isolated activities
magical thinking: belief that one’s own actions influence external
events in the environment; often referred to as “superstitious
thinking”
malaise: feeling of discomfort or that something is not right
maleficence: act of committing harm or evil; prevented by using
evidence-based interventions and adhering to accepted standards of
care
malingering: exaggerate or feign illness in order to escape duty or
work; motivation to engage in behavior is intentional with external
(secondary) gain
managed care: coordination of benefits by a third-party (usually
payers) to reduce the cost of providing health care and ensuring
continuity of treatment
mania: extreme state of excitement and overactivity; often
55
accompanied by overoptimism, grandiosity, and/or impaired
judgment; preoccupation with an activity or idea when used as a
suffix, such as with the impulse control disorders of kleptomania and
pyromania
105
mascot: family role focused on using humor to ease tension and
distract from dysfunctional situations
mediator: social work role that focuses on resolving conflicts
medical model: model of health that suggests that disease is
detected and identified through a systematic process of observation,
description, and differentiation, such as medical examinations, tests,
or symptom descriptions
medical necessity: services or supplies that are deemed
essential to diagnose or treat medical or behavioral conditions
according to accepted standards of care
medication-assisted treatment: use of prescribed
medications to relieve the withdrawal symptoms and psychological
cravings associated with substance use disorders; evidence-based
treatment option used in combination with counseling and behavioral
therapies
mental status exam: assessment of current mental capacity
through evaluation of general appearance, behavior, beliefs, mood,
and cognition (attention, orientation, memory, and so forth)
mood stabilizer: medication used to manage mood swings and
stabilize symptoms in individuals with mood disorders like bipolar
disorder
morbidity: rate of disease in a group or population; presence of
unhealthiness or psychological state
motivational interviewing: counseling approach aimed at
helping make changes; techniques focus on resolving ambivalence,
eliciting change talk and behavior, and helping utilize internal
motivation to make needed changes
106
multidisciplinary: drawing on knowledge from different
disciplines but staying within their boundaries; distinct from
interdisciplinary
narrative therapy: aims to separate clients from their problems,
allowing them to externalize their issues rather than internalize them;
involves adjusting the life stories through writings
narcolepsy: disorder consisting of excessive daytime sleepiness
accompanied by brief episodes of sleep during waking hours; can
occur in dangerous situations such as while driving a car; chronic
condition with no cure, but symptoms can be managed with
medication and lifestyle changes
negative entropy: system becoming less disordered or more
ordered; growing or developing
negligence: failure to use reasonable care or caution
neurotransmitter: chemical messenger in the brain that
transmits signals between neurons, influencing various brain
functions and behaviors
object permanence: understanding that something exists even if
it cannot be seen due to the ability to form a mental representation of
the object or person
object relations theory: describes how the inability to form
56
and develop positive and enduring attachments are based on early
life experiences of separation or lack of connection with significant
caregivers
ombudsman: an official who investigate, settles, and reports on
complaints which can involve violations of human rights or systemic
issues; often referred to as a “public advocate” when working for a
government authority
107
olfactory hallucinations: smelling something that is not
present; can be either pleasant or non-pleasant odors
organic brain syndrome: persistent mental impairment
associated with a disturbance in consciousness, cognition, mood,
affect, and behavior caused by dementia, delirium, infection, injury,
or substance-induced psychosis
palliative care: medical care that focuses on comfort rather than
providing a care; goal is to reduce the severity of a disease or slow
its progress
paradoxical directive: prescribing the symptoms or behaviors
that are targeted for change; often referred to as “reverse
psychology”
paranoia: unwarranted or delusional belief that one is being
persecuted, harassed, or betrayed by others; can occur as a
symptom of a mental disorder or condition
paraphrasing: therapeutic technique of using different words to
re-state assertions to improve understanding and help with analyzing
meaning
parasomnia: disorder in which odd or dangerous events occur
during sleep; can include sleep talking, sleepwalking, sleep terrors,
and so forth
parity: equality between two or more constructs or policies; social
workers often advocate that mental health care should be treated
with same care and funding as physical care
partialization: breaking down issues or processes into
incremental steps or actions
108
permanency planning: assessing and preparing children for
long-term care when in out-of-home placements such as with family,
resource families, or residential facilities
permissive parenting: caregivers take on a friendship role,
preferring to avoid conflict; mostly allowing children to do what they
want and offering limited guidance or direction
polarized thinking: often referred to as “black and white” or “all
or nothing” thinking; assessing reality and situations in the extremes
without considering that the presence of more moderate or tempered
alternatives
positive regard: unconditional acceptance of others without
judgment
prescribing the symptom: treatment technique in which social
worker directs the continuation of the undesired behavior or action;
paradoxical directive which demonstrates that behavior or action can
be controlled
privileged communication: legal right to keep professional
interactions private; applies to doctor–patient and lawyer–client
discussions; a psychotherapist-patient privilege was established in
the Federal Rules of Evidence in 1996 with the Jaffee v. Redmond
case
prognosis: prediction of the course, duration, severity, and
57
outcome of a condition, disease, or disorder; helps a client weigh the
benefits of different treatment options
pro bono: provision of services free-of-charge, typically for
individuals who cannot afford them
projection bias: thinking others have the same priority, attitude or
belief
109
projective testing: eliciting responses to ambiguous scenes,
words, or images to uncover hidden conflicts or emotions that can be
addressed through psychotherapy or other treatments
prosocial behavior: action intended to benefit others such as
helping, sharing, donating, and/or volunteering
proxy: someone who is authorized to act on behalf of another; used
to describe a decision or vote made for another
psychodrama: therapeutic technique in which clients play their
antagonists or themselves in stressful roles; provides opportunity to
act out inner feelings and relieve anxiety
psychodynamic theory: therapeutic approach that explores
unconscious thoughts, emotions, and past experiences to gain
insight and facilitate personal growth and change
psychopharmacology: use of medication to treat mental
disorders; some disorders, such as those characterized by
psychosis, require this approach
psychosis: incapacitating mental functioning characterized by
impaired thinking, reasoning, and reality testing; distorted
perceptions; inappropriate affect or emotional reactions; ideas of
reference; hallucinations; and/or delusions
psychosomatic: physical ailments that are caused by
psychological factors; connection between mind and body
psychotherapy notes: documentation taken during a therapy
session by a mental health professional that is separated from the
rest of the client file; not meant to be shared with others
psychotic break: sudden onset or worsening of psychotic
symptoms, often accompanied by a loss of contact with reality
110
power of attorney: legal document that gives an individual
authority to make decisions for another person as needed
rapid cycling: pattern in bipolar disorder where an individual
experiences frequent shifts between manic, hypomanic, depressive,
or mixed states
rapprochement: part of a development process in which children
differentiate themselves from their caregivers (develop awareness of
separate identity); occurs at about 18 months in which there is a
renewed interest in dependency on caregivers
reality testing: assessing limitations in light of biological,
physiological, social, or environmental actualities; distinguish
between fantasy and real life
receptive communication: ability to understand and
comprehend spoken language heard or read; understanding of
language “input”
redaction: hiding or removing confidential information for legal
or security purposes
58
reflection: therapeutic technique to mirror or expand upon
statements to help with recognizing issues and making connections
for deeper understanding
reframing: technique used to help see a behavior or problem in a
different way, including the positive aspects which result; also called
“cognitive reframing”
residual: something left behind; physical or psychological symptom
which remains treatment; residual model of policy posits that the
government should only be involved as a last resort as other
interventions have failed
111
respite care: temporary assistance to persons who need ongoing
help to provide relief for regular caregivers; essential to avoid
caregiving burnout
role complementarity: acting in an expected manner;
performing appropriately in assumed roles; opposite of “role
discomplementarity”
role reversal: exchanging their duties and/or positions; can be
used as a therapeutic technique in psychodrama to help increase
understanding of others’ feelings and experiences
rumination: regurgitating food and then swallowing it; being
preoccupied with certain obsessive thoughts
scapegoat: person blamed for the wrongdoings, mistakes, or
faults of others; family role focused on creating other problems and
concerns, often through misbehavior, to deflect attention away from
the real family issue(s)
secondary prevention: screening to identify diseases in the
earliest stages, before the onset of signs and symptoms, through
measures such as mammography and regular blood pressure testing
secondary trauma: emotional distress which occurs from being
exposed to those who have been traumatized; similar symptoms to
post traumatic stress disorder; also called “vicarious trauma”
self-actualization: full realization of creative, intellectual, and
social potential; results from internal drive and external reward
self-efficacy: how capable individuals feel about achieving their
goals
serotonin: a neurotransmitter in the brain that is the key to mood
regulation
112
shaping: reinforcing progressively closer approximations to the
desired behaviors; behavior management technique
sliding scale: amount to be paid increases or decreases based on
level of income
social work interview: purposeful conversations between
practitioners and clients, involving verbal and nonverbal
communication; purpose includes gathering information about the
client’s history, needs and strengths
somatization: psychological distress that is unconsciously
expressed as physical ailments; counseling can help to address;
motivation is unconscious with no apparent gain for the illness or
condition
splitting: failure to recognize positive and negative qualities as
59
a cohesive whole; symptom of borderline personality disorder;
cognitive distortion characterized by “all or nothing” thinking
standard of care: level and type of service that a reasonably
competent and skilled professional, with similar education and
experience, would have provided under the circumstances
strategic family therapy: focus is on identifying and applying
novel interventions to produce behavioral change rather than on
helping to gain insight into the sources of problems
structural family therapy: focus is on helping improve
functioning through examining structure, rules, roles, and boundaries
stupor: state of lethargy and impaired consciousness, marked by
disorientation, unresponsiveness, and immobility
suicidal ideation: having ideas or ruminations about the
possibility of ending one’s own life
113
superego: part of the personality that represents internalized
societal rules, morals, and values
symbiotic relationship: interdependence between two or more
people (or organisms in biology); an infant is dependent on a parent
physically and emotionally initially, but dependence should subside
over time; can be either functional or dysfunctional (co-dependency)
systematic desensitization: behavior management technique
which provides incremental exposure to anxiety-provoking stimuli or
conditions with the aim of eventually reducing fear
tactile hallucinations: feeling touch or movement in or on one’s
body which cannot be explained by any tangible evidence
Tarasoff decision: landmark California court decision that
stipulates that those engaged in psychotherapy have a duty to
protect or warn third parties if client poses an imminent and
foreseeable threats to them; established “duty to warn” mandate
tardive dyskinesia: neurological syndrome that results in
repetitive, involuntary, purposeless movements; caused by the long-
term use of certain drugs which are used for the treatment of
psychiatric and other conditions; usually treated by stopping or
minimizing use of the offending drug
task-centered treatment: short-term intervention in which
problems and goals/activities needed to address them are identified
with clear timeframes for completion; highly structured; client
responsible and highly involved in the change effort
task group: group formed to solve a problem, provide a service, or
create a product
tertiary prevention: intervention with those who are already
affected; goals focused on improving quality of life by reducing
114
limitations or delaying complications
third party payers: monetary reimbursement by insurance
companies or government agencies for services provided to clients
toxic stress: strong, frequent and/or prolonged activation of the
body’s stress response system without adequate protective
relationships and other mediating factors; often results in poor health
outcomes
transference: emotional reactions by clients in the therapeutic
60
process due to unresolved experiences and/or unconscious
thoughts; usually focused on the helper as a result of displacement
or projection
trauma bonding: unhealthy attachment by survivor to an abuser
triage: identifying treatment urgency during disaster or mass
tragedy; focused on meeting the needs of those with more serious
injuries or problems first
triangulation: use of exclusion or threats in a three-person
relationship to maintain control; adding a third person to a two-
person interaction or relationship to ease tension; often seen in
dysfunctional families; use of different data sources in research to
increase credibility and confidence in findings
unconditional positive regard: involves showing complete
support and acceptance of a person no matter what that person says
or does
uninvolved parenting: overall sense of indifference by
caregivers; limited engagement with their children and rarely
implement rules; not always intentional, as caregivers are often
struggling with their own issues; referred to as uninvolved parenting
115
unspecified mental disorder: symptoms cause clinically
significant distress or impairment in functioning but do not meet the
full criteria for the mental disorder; used in situations in which person
diagnosing chooses not to specify the reason that criteria are not
met
utilization review: process to determine the level of care needed
and whether services being delivered are justified; part of quality
assurance process; often conducted by third-party payers or insurers
vicarious liability: legal premise that not only is a defendant
liable for actions but the person’s employer, supervisor, or instructor
may also be seen as culpable
vicarious trauma: psychological and other distress based on
interactions with those who have been traumatized; usually develops
over time
116
61
Content Area I: Human
Development, Diversity, and
Behavior in the Environment
(24%)62
117
CHAPTER63
1
Human Growth and Development
THEORIES OF HUMAN DEVELOPMENT THROUGHOUT THE
LIFESPAN (E.G., PHYSICAL, SOCIAL, EMOTIONAL,
COGNITIVE, BEHAVIORAL)
Social work theories are general explanations that are supported by
evidence obtained through the scientific method. A theory may explain
human behavior by describing how humans interact with each other or
react to certain stimuli. Because human behavior is so complex,
numerous theories are utilized to guide practice.
Many factors influence people and their behaviors. The first influence
is individual characteristics or differences that are unique to each client,
such as knowledge, attitudes, beliefs, general personality style, and
disposition. There are also interpersonal factors that impact how clients
behave and feel. These may include social support, social cohesion, work
relationships, friendships, and/or religious belonging. A third influence
comes from institutional factors. These are the rules, regulations, and
informal structures in the organizations where clients live and work.
Institutional rules may include prohibition of certain behaviors (i.e.,
smoking), dress expectations, and/or rules about social interaction. A
fourth influence is community factors, which come from the social
environment in which clients live, including social resources/networks and
community norms. The last influence is public policy, which may mandate
regulations and laws such as wearing seat belts, not using drugs, and/or
limits on physical aggression. These hierarchical factors are the basis of
the ecological perspective or model.
In social work, there are many theoretical perspectives that help to
explain the human behavior of clients, including, but not limited to,
118
systems, conflict, rational choice, social constructionist, psychodynamic,
developmental, social behavioral, and humanistic perspectives.
Systems: Systems are made up of interrelated parts; each part
impacts all other parts, as well as the system as a whole. The
dynamic interactions within, between, and among systems produce
both stability and change.
Conflict: Clients try to advance their own interests over the
interests of others as they compete for scarce resources. Power is
unequally divided and some social groups dominate others.
Members of nondominant groups become alienated from society.
Social change is driven by conflict.
Rational Choice: Clients are rational and goal directed and
64
human interaction involves exchange of social resources such as
love, approval, information, money, and physical labor. Clients have
self-interest and try to maximize rewards and minimize costs. Power
comes from unequal resources in exchanges.
Social Constructionist: Social reality is created when clients, in
social interaction, develop a common understanding of their world.
Clients are influenced by social processes that are grounded in
customs, as well as cultural and historical contexts.
Psychodynamic: Unconscious, as well as conscious, mental
activity serves as the motivating force in human behavior. Early
childhood experiences are central and clients may become
overwhelmed by internal or external demands. Defense mechanisms
are used to avoid becoming overwhelmed.
Developmental: Human development occurs in defined, age-
related stages that build upon one another and are distinct. Human
development is a complex interaction of biological, psychological,
and social factors.
Social Behavioral: Human behavior is learned when clients
interact with the environment through association, reinforcement,
and imitation. All human problems can be formulated as undesirable
behavior and can be changed through techniques such as classical
and operant conditioning.
119
Humanistic Perspective: Each client is unique and is
responsible for choices made. Clients have the capacity to change
themselves because human behavior is driven by a desire for
growth, personal meaning, and competence. Behaving in ways that
are not consistent with the true self causes clients anxiety.
Social Development
Human beings are inherently social. Developing competencies in this
domain enhances a person’s mental health, success in work, and ability
to achieve in life tasks.
Erik Erikson was interested in how children socialize and how this
affects their sense of self. He saw personality as developing throughout
the life course and looked at identity crises as the focal point for each
stage of human development.
According to Erikson, there are eight distinct stages, with two possible
outcomes. Successful completion of each stage results in a healthy
personality and successful interactions with others. Failure to successfully
complete a stage can result in a reduced ability to complete further
stages and, therefore, a more unhealthy personality and sense of self.
These stages, however, can be resolved successfully at a later time.
Trust Versus Mistrust
From birth to 1 year of age, children begin to learn the ability to trust
others based upon the consistency of their caregiver(s). If trust develops
successfully, the child gains confidence and security in the world and is
able to feel secure even when threatened. Unsuccessful completion of
this stage can result in an inability to trust, and therefore a sense of fear
about the inconsistent world. It may result in anxiety, heightened
insecurities, and feelings of mistrust in the world around them.
Autonomy Versus Shame and Doubt
65
Between the ages of 1 and 3, children begin to assert their independence
by walking away from their mother, picking which toy to play with, and
making choices about what they like to wear, to eat, and so on. If children
in this stage are encouraged and supported in their increased
independence, they become more confident and secure in their own
ability to survive in the world. If children are criticized, overly controlled, or
not given the opportunity to assert themselves, they begin to feel
120
inadequate in their ability to survive, and may then become overly
dependent upon others while lacking self-esteem and feeling a sense of
shame or doubt in their own abilities.
Initiative Versus Guilt
Around age 3 and continuing to age 6, children assert themselves more
frequently. They begin to plan activities, make up games, and initiate
activities with others. If given this opportunity, children develop a sense of
initiative, and feel secure in their ability to lead others and make
decisions. Conversely, if this tendency is squelched, either through
criticism or control, children develop a sense of guilt. They may feel like
nuisances to others and will therefore remain followers, lacking self-
initiative.
Industry Versus Inferiority
From age 6 to puberty, children begin to develop a sense of pride in their
accomplishments. They initiate projects, see them through to completion,
and feel good about what they have achieved. If children are encouraged
and reinforced for their initiative, they begin to feel industrious and feel
confident in their ability to achieve goals. If this initiative is not
encouraged but instead restricted, children begin to feel inferior, doubting
their abilities, and failing to reach their potential.
Identity Versus Role Confusion
During adolescence, the transition from childhood to adulthood is most
important. Children are becoming more independent, and begin to look at
the future in terms of career, relationships, families, housing, and so on.
During this period, they explore possibilities and begin to form their own
identities based upon the outcome of their explorations. This sense of
who they are can be hindered, which results in a sense of confusion (“I
don’t know what I want to be when I grow up”) about themselves and their
role in the world.
Intimacy Versus Isolation
In young adulthood, individuals begin to share themselves more
intimately with others and explore relationships leading toward longer
term commitments with others outside the family. Successful completion
can lead to comfortable relationships and a sense of commitment, safety,
121
and care within a relationship. Avoiding intimacy and fearing commitment
and relationships can lead to isolation, loneliness, and sometimes
depression.
Generativity Versus Stagnation
During middle adulthood, individuals establish careers, settle down within
relationships, begin families, and develop a sense of being a part of the
bigger picture. They give back to society through raising children, being
productive at work, and becoming involved in community activities and
66
organizations. By failing to achieve these objectives, individuals
become stagnant and feel unproductive.
Ego Integrity Versus Despair
As individuals grow older and become senior citizens, they tend to slow
down and explore life as retired people. It is during this time that they
contemplate accomplishments and are able to develop a sense of
integrity if they are satisfied with the progression of their lives. If they see
their lives as being unproductive and failing to accomplish life goals, they
become dissatisfied with life and develop despair, often leading to
depression and hopelessness.
On a micro level, social development is learning how to behave and
interact well with others. Social development relies on emotional
development or learning how to manage feelings so they are productive
and not counterproductive.
On a macro level, social development is about a commitment that
development processes need to benefit people, particularly, but not only,
the poor. It also recognizes the way people interact in groups and society,
and the norms that facilitate such interaction.
Social development implies a change in social institutions. Progress
toward an inclusive society, for example, implies that individuals treat
each other fairly in their daily lives, whether in the family, workplace, or
public office. Social cohesion is enhanced when peaceful and safe
environments within neighborhoods and communities are created. Social
accountability exists to the extent that individuals’ voices are expressed
and heard. Reforms aimed at improving rights and more participatory
governance are part of the process by which institutional change is
achieved.
Emotional Development
122
Emotional milestones are often harder to pinpoint than signs of physical
development. This area emphasizes many skills that increase self-
awareness and self-regulation. Social skills and emotional development
are reflected in the ability to pay attention, make transitions from one
activity to another, and cooperate with others.
During childhood, there is a lot happening during playtime. Children
are lifting, dropping, looking, pouring, bouncing, hiding, building, knocking
down, and more. Children are busy learning when they are playing. Play
is the true work of childhood.
During play, children are also learning that they are liked and fun to be
around. These experiences give them the self-confidence they need to
build loving and supportive relationships all their lives.
Cognitive Development
Cognitive development focuses on development in terms of information
processing, conceptual resources, perceptual skill, language learning,
and other aspects of brain development. It is the emergence of the ability
to think and understand.
A major controversy in cognitive development has been “nature and
nurture,” that is, the question of whether cognitive development is mainly
determined by a client’s innate qualities (“nature”), or by a client’s
personal experiences (“nurture”). However, it is now recognized by most
experts that this is a false dichotomy: There is overwhelming evidence
from biological and behavioral sciences that, from the earliest points in
67
development, gene activity interacts with events and experiences in
the environment.
There are six levels of cognition:
1. Knowledge: rote memorization, recognition, or recall of facts
2. Comprehension: understanding what the facts mean
3. Application: correct use of the facts, rules, or ideas
4. Analysis: breaking down information into component parts
5. Synthesis: combination of facts, ideas, or information to make a ne
whole
6. Evaluation: judging or forming an opinion about the information
situation
123
Ideally, in order for a client to learn, there should be objectives at each
of these levels. Clients may have goals to learn in any of three domains
of development:
1. Cognitive: mental skills (knowledge)
2. Affective: growth in feelings or emotional areas (attitude or self)
3. Psychomotor: manual or physical skills (skills)
Jean Piaget was a developmental psychologist best known for his
theory of cognitive development. His stages address the acquisition of
knowledge and how humans come to gradually acquire it. Piaget’s theory
holds that children learn through interaction with the environment and
others.
Piaget also developed a theory of moral development, but the work by
Lawrence Kohlberg is best known in this area. He agreed with Piaget’s
theory of moral development in principle, but wanted to develop the ideas
further.
Stage Age Characteristics
1.
Sensorimoto
r
0–2
years 1. Retains image of objects
2. Develops primitive logic in manipulating objects
3. Begins intentional actions
4. Play is imitative
5. Signals meaning—infant invests meaning in
event (i.e., babysitter arriving means mother is
leaving)
6. Symbol meaning (language) begins in last part of
stage
2.
al
Preoperation
2–7
years 1. Progress from concrete to abstract thinking
2. Can comprehend past, present, and future
3. Night terrors
4. Acquires words and symbols
5. Magical thinking
6. Thinking is not generalized
7. Thinking is concrete, irreversible, and
egocentric
h.
68
Cannot see another point of view
124
i. Thinking is centered on one detail or event
Imaginary friends often emerge during this stage and
may last into elementary school. Although children do
interact with them, most know that their friends are not
real and only pretend they are real.
Thus, having an imaginary friend in childhood does not
indicate the presence of a disorder. It is a normal part
of development and social workers should normalize
behavior with parents who are distressed about this
activity during this developmental stage.
3. Concrete
Operations
7–11
years 1. Beginnings of abstract thought
2. Plays games with rules
3. Cause and effect relationship understood
4. Logical implications are understood
5. Thinking is independent of experience
6. Thinking is reversible
7. Rules of logic are developed
4. Formal
Operations
11
throug
h
maturi
ty
1. Higher level of abstraction
2. Planning for future
3. Thinks hypothetically
4. Assumes adult roles and responsibilities
Kohlberg believed that moral development parallels cognitive
development. Kohlberg’s theory holds that moral reasoning, which is the
basis for ethical behavior, has six identifiable developmental constructive
stages—each more adequate at responding to moral dilemmas than the
last. Kohlberg suggested that the higher stages of moral development
provide the person with greater capacities or abilities in terms of decision
making and that these stages allow people to handle increasingly
complex dilemmas. He grouped his six stages of moral reasoning into
three major levels. A person must pass through each successive stage of
moral development without skipping a stage.
69
125
Learning theory is a conceptual framework describing how information
is absorbed, processed, and retained during learning. Cognitive,
emotional, and environmental influences, as well as prior experience, all
play a part in how understanding, or a worldview, is acquired or changed,
as well as how knowledge and skills are retained.
There are many learning theories but all can be conceptualized as
fitting into four distinct orientations:
1. Behaviorist (Pavlov, Skinner)—learning is viewed through change
behavior and the stimuli in the external environment are the focus
learning. Social workers aim to change the external environment
order to bring about desired change.
2. Cognitive (Piaget)—learning is viewed through internal ment
processes (including insight, information processing, memory, an
perception) and the focus of learning is internal cognitive structure
Social workers aim to develop opportunities to foster capacity a
skills to improve learning.
126
3. Humanistic (Maslow)—learning is viewed as a person’s activiti
aimed at reaching the person’s full potential, and the focus of learni
is in meeting cognitive and other needs. Social workers aim
develop the whole person.
4. Social/Situational (Bandura)—learning is obtained between peop
and their environment and their interactions and observations in soc
contexts. Social workers establish opportunities for conversation a
participation to occur.
Behavioral Development
Behavioral theories suggest that personality is a result of interaction
between the individual and the environment. Behavioral theorists study
observable and measurable behaviors, rejecting theories that take
internal thoughts and feelings into account.
These theories represent the systematic application of principles of
learning to the analysis and treatment of behaviors. Behaviors determine
feelings. Thus, changing behaviors will also change or eliminate
undesired feelings. The goal is to modify behavior.
The focus is on observable behavior—a target symptom, a problem
behavior, or an environmental condition, rather than on the personality of
a client.
There are two fundamental classes of behavior: respondent and
70
operant.
1. Respondent: involuntary behavior (anxiety, sexual response) that
automatically elicited by certain behavior. A stimulus elicits a respons
2. Operant: voluntary behavior (walking, talking) that is controlled by
consequences in the environment
Best-known applications of behavior modification are sexual
dysfunctions, phobic disorders, compulsive behaviors (i.e., overeating,
smoking), and training of persons with intellectual disabilities and/or
autism spectrum disorder.
It is impractical for those using behavior modification to observe
behavior when clients are not in residential inpatient settings offering 24-
hour care. Thus, social workers train clients to observe and monitor their
own behaviors. For example, clients can monitor their food intake or how
many cigarettes they smoke. Client self-monitoring has advantages (i.e.,
127
inexpensive, practical, and therapeutic) and disadvantages (i.e., clients
can collect inadequate and inaccurate information or can resist collecting
any at all).
There are several behavioral paradigms.
A. RESPONDENT OR CLASSICAL CONDITIONING (Pavlov): Learning
occurs as a result of pairing previously neutral (conditioned) stimulus
with an unconditioned (involuntary) stimulus so that the conditioned
stimulus eventually elicits the response normally elicited by the
unconditioned stimulus.
Unconditioned Stimulus ⟶ Unconditioned Response
Unconditioned Stimulus + Conditioned Stimulus ⟶ Unconditioned
Response
Conditioned Stimulus ⟶ Conditioned Response
B. OPERANT CONDITIONING (B. F. Skinner): Antecedent events or
stimuli precede behaviors, which, in turn, are followed by
consequences. Consequences that increase the occurrence of the
behavior are referred to as reinforcing consequences; consequences
that decrease the occurrence of the behavior are referred to as
punishing consequences. Reinforcement aims to increase behavior
frequency, whereas punishment aims to decrease it.
Antecedent ⟶ Response/Behavior ⟶ Consequence
Operant Techniques:
1. Positive reinforcement: Increases probability that behavior
occur—praising, giving tokens, or otherwise rewarding pos
behavior
2. Negative reinforcement: Behavior increases because a neg
(aversive) stimulus is removed (i.e., remove shock)
3. Positive punishment: Presentation of undesirable stim
following a behavior for the purpose of decreasing or eliminating
behavior (i.e., hitting, shocking)
4. Negative punishment: Removal of a desirable stimulus follo
a behavior for the purpose of decreasing or eliminating that beha
(i.e., removing something positive, such as a token or dessert)
128
Specific Behavioral Terms:
71
1. Aversion therapy: Any treatment aimed at reducing
attractiveness of a stimulus or a behavior by repeated pairing of it
an aversive stimulus. An example of this is trea
alcoholism with antabuse.
2. Biofeedback: Behavior training program that teaches a person
to control certain functions such as heart rate, blood press
temperature, and muscular tension. Biofeedback is often used
attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) and anxiety disorde
3. Extinction: Withholding a reinforcer that normally follow
behavior. Behavior that fails to produce reinforcement will event
cease.
4. Flooding: A treatment procedure in which a client’s anxiet
extinguished by prolonged real or imagined exposure to high-inte
feared stimuli.
5. In vivo desensitization: Pairing and movement throug
hierarchy of anxiety, from least to most anxiety-provoking situat
takes place in “real” setting.
6. Modeling: Method of instruction that involves an individual
model) demonstrating the behavior to be acquired by a client.
7. Rational emotive therapy (RET): A cognitively oriented the
in which a social worker seeks to change a client’s irrational belie
argument, persuasion, and rational reevaluation and by teachin
client to counter self-defeating thinking with new, nondistressing
statements.
8. Shaping: Method used to train a new behavior by prompting
reinforcing successive approximations of the desired behavior.
9. Systematic desensitization: An anxiety-inhibiting respo
cannot occur at the same time as the anxiety response. Anx
producing stimulus is paired with relaxation-producing respons
that eventually an anxiety-producing stimulus produces a relax
response. At each step a client’s reaction of fear or dread is overc
129
by pleasant feelings engendered as the new behavior is reinforce
receiving a reward. The reward could be a compliment, a gif
relaxation.
10. Time out: Removal of something desirable—negative punishm
technique.
11. Token economy: A client receives tokens as reinforcemen
performing specified behaviors. The tokens function as curr
within the environment and can be exchanged for desired go
services, or privileges.
THE INDICATORS OF NORMAL AND ABNORMAL PHYSICAL,
COGNITIVE, EMOTIONAL, AND SEXUAL DEVELOPMENT
THROUGHOUT THE LIFESPAN
Human growth, development, and learning become progressively
complex over time and are influenced through a variety of experiences
and interactions. Growth, development, and learning proceed in
predictable patterns reflecting increasingly complex levels of organization
across the life course. Each developmental stage has distinctive
characteristics; however, each builds from the experiences of earlier
72
stages. The domains of development are integrated within the child, so
when one area is affected, other areas are also affected. Development
proceeds at varying rates from child to child, as well as across
developmental domains for individual children, reflecting the unique
nature of each. Because growth and development are generally
predictable, social workers should know the milestones of healthy
development and the signs of potential delay or disability.
Child Development
Child development refers to the physical, mental, and socioemotional
changes that occur between birth and the end of adolescence, as a child
progresses from dependency to increasing autonomy. It is a continuous
process with a predictable sequence, yet having a unique course.
Individuals do not progress at the same rate, and each stage is affected
by the preceding types of development. Because these developmental
changes may be strongly influenced by genetic factors and events during
130
prenatal life, genetics and prenatal development are usually included as
part of the study of child development.
Infants and Toddlers (Age 0–3)
Healthy Growth and Development
■ Physical—grows at a rapid rate, especially brain size
■ Mental—learns through senses, exploring, playing, communicates
crying, babbling, then “baby talk,” simple sentences
■ Social–Emotional—seeks to build trust in others, dependent, beginnin
to develop a sense of self
Key Health Care Issues
■ Communication—provide security, physical closeness; promo
healthy parent–child bonds
■ Health—keep immunizations/checkups on schedule; provide prop
nutrition, sleep, skin care, oral health, and routine screenings
■ Safety—ensure a safe environment for exploring, playing, and sleepin
Examples of Age-Specific Care for Infants and Toddlers
■ Involve child and parent(s) in care during feeding, diapering, an
bathing
■ Provide safe toys and opportunities for play
■ Encourage child to communicate—smile, talk softly
■ Help parent(s) learn about proper child care
Young Children (Age 4–6)
Healthy Growth and Development
■ Physical—grows at a slower rate; improving motor skills; dresses se
toilet trained
131
■ Mental—begins to use symbols; improving memory; vivid
73
imagination, fears; likes stories
■ Social–Emotional—identifies with parent(s); becomes mo
independent; sensitive to others’ feelings
Key Health Care Issues
■ Communication—give praise, rewards, clear rules
■ Health—keep immunizations/checkups on schedule; promote healt
habits (good nutrition, personal hygiene, etc.)
■ Safety—promote safety habits (use bike helmets, safety belts, etc.)
Examples of Age-Specific Care for Young Children
■ Involve parent(s) and child in care—let child make some food choices
■ Use toys and games to teach child and reduce fear
■ Encourage child to ask questions, play with others, and talk abo
feelings
■ Help parent(s) teach child safety rules
Older Children (Age 7–12)
Healthy Growth and Development
■ Physical—grows slowly until a “spurt” at puberty
■ Mental—understands cause and effect, can read, write, do mat
active, eager learner
■ Social–Emotional—develops greater sense of self; focuses on scho
activities, negotiates for greater independence
Key Health Care Issues
■ Communication—help child to feel competent, useful
■ Health—keep immunizations/checkups on schedule; give informatio
132
on alcohol, tobacco, other drugs, and sexuality
■ Safety—promote safety habits (playground safety, resolving conflic
peacefully, etc.)
Examples of Age-Specific Care for Older Children
■ Allow child to make some care decisions (in which arm do you wa
vaccination?)
■ Build self-esteem—ask child to help you do a task, recogniz
achievements, and so on
■ Guide child in making healthy, safe lifestyle choices
■ Help parent(s) talk with child about peer pressure, sexuality, alcoh
tobacco, and other drugs
Adolescent Development
74
The development of children ages 13 through 18 years old is a critical
time as children develop the ability to understand abstract ideas, such as
higher math concepts, and develop moral philosophies, including rights
and privileges, and move toward a more mature sense of themselves and
their purpose.
Healthy Growth and Development
■ Physical—grows in spurts; matures physically; able to reproduce
■ Mental—becomes an abstract thinker (goes beyond simple solution
can consider many options, etc.); chooses own values
■ Social–Emotional—develops own identity; builds close relationship
tries to balance peer group with family interests; concerned abo
appearances, challenges authority
Key Health Care Issues
75
■ Communication—provide acceptance, privacy; build teamwor
respect
■ Health—encourage regular checkups; promote sexual responsibili
133
advise against substance abuse; update immunizations
■ Safety—discourage risk-taking (promote safe driving, violen
prevention, etc.)
Examples of Age-Specific Care for Adolescents
■ Treat more as an adult than child—avoid authoritarian approaches
■ Show respect—be considerate of how treatment may affe
relationships
■ Guide teen in making positive lifestyle choices (i.e., corre
misinformation from teen’s peers)
■ Encourage open communication between parent(s), teen, and peers
Adult Development
Adult development refers to the changes that occur in biological,
psychological, and interpersonal domains of human life from the end of
adolescence until the end of life. These changes may be gradual or rapid,
and can reflect positive, negative, or no change from previous levels of
functioning.
Young Adults (Age 18–35)
Healthy Growth and Development
■ Physical—reaches physical and sexual maturity, nutritional needs a
for maintenance, not growth
■ Mental—acquires new skills, information; uses these to solve problem
■ Social–Emotional—seeks closeness with others; sets career goa
chooses lifestyle, community; starts own family
Key Health Care Issues
■ Communication—be supportive and honest; respect personal values
■ Health—encourage regular checkups; promote healthy lifestyle (prop
nutrition, exercise, weight, etc.); inform about health risks (hea
134
disease, cancer, etc.); update immunizations
■ Safety—provide information on hazards at home, and work
Examples of Age-Specific Care for Young Adults
■ Support the person in making health care decisions
■ Encourage healthy and safe habits at work and home
■ Recognize commitments to family, career, and community (tim
money, etc.)
Middle Age Adults (Age 36–64)
Healthy Growth and Development
■ Physical—begins to age; experiences menopause (women); m
develop chronic health problems
■ Mental—uses life experiences to learn, create, solve problems
■ Social–Emotional—hopes to contribute to future generations; sta
productive, avoids feeling “stuck” in life; balances dreams with reali
plans retirement; may care for children and parents
Key Health Care Issues
■ Communication—keep a hopeful attitude; focus on strengths, n
limitations
■ Health—encourage regular checkups and preventive exams; addre
age-related changes; monitor health risks; update immunizations
■ Safety—address age-related changes (effects on sense, reflexes, etc
Examples of Age-Specific Care for Middle Adults
■ Address worries about future—encourage talking about feelings, plan
and so on
■ Recognize the person’s physical, mental, and soc
abilities/contributions
135
■ Help with plans for a healthy active retirement
Older Adults (Age 65–79)
Healthy Growth and Development
■ Physical—ages gradually; natural decline in some physical abilitie
senses
■ Mental—continues to be an active learner, thinker; memory skills m
start to decline
■ Social–Emotional—takes on new roles (grandparent, widow
widower, etc.); balances independence, dependence; reviews life
Key Health Care Issues
76
■ Communication—give respect; prevent isolation; encourag
acceptance of aging
■ Health—monitor health closely; promote physical, mental, and soc
activity; guard against depression, apathy; update immunizations
■ Safety—promote home safety; especially preventing falls
Examples of Age-Specific Care for Older Adults
■ Encourage the person to talk about feelings of loss, grief, a
achievements
■ Provide information, materials, and so on, to make medication use a
home safe
■ Provide support for coping with any impairments (avoid maki
assumptions about loss of abilities)
■ Encourage social activity with peers, as a volunteer, and so on
Elders (Age 80 and Older)
Healthy Growth and Development
■ Physical—continues to decline in physical abilities; at increasing ri
136
for chronic illness, major health problems
■ Mental—continues to learn; memory skills and/or speed of learnin
may decline; confusion often signals illness or medication problem
■ Social–Emotional—accepts end of life and personal losses; lives
independently as possible
Key Health Care Issues
■ Communication—encourage the person to express feelings, though
avoid despair; use humor, stay positive
■ Health—monitor health closely, promote self-care; ensure prop
nutrition, activity level, rest; reduce stress, update immunizations
■ Safety—prevent injury, ensure safe living environment
Examples of Age-Specific Care for Adults Ages 80 and Older
■ Encourage independence—provide physical, mental, and soc
activities
■ Support end-of-life decisions—provide information, resources, and
on
■ Assist the person in self-care—promote medication safety; provid
safety grips, ramps, and so on
THEORIES OF SEXUAL DEVELOPMENT THROUGHOUT THE
LIFESPAN
Many people cannot imagine that everyone—babies, children, teens,
adults, and older adults—are sexual beings. Some inappropriately believe
that sexual activity is reserved for early and middle adulthood. Teens
77
often feel that adults are too old for sexual intercourse. Sexuality,
though, is much more than sexual intercourse. Humans are sexual beings
throughout life.
Sexuality in infants and toddlers—Children are sexual even before
birth. Males can have erections while still in the uterus, and some boys
are born with an erection. Infants touch and rub their genitals because it
provides pleasure. Little boys and girls can experience orgasm from
137
masturbation, although boys will not ejaculate until puberty. By about age
2, children know their own gender. They are aware of differences in the
genitals of males and females and in how males and females urinate.
Sexuality in children (age 3–7)—Preschool children are interested in
everything about their world, including sexuality. They may practice
urinating in different positions. They are highly affectionate and enjoy
hugging other children and adults. They begin to be more social and may
imitate adult social and sexual behaviors, such as holding hands and
kissing. Many young children play “doctor” during this stage, looking at
other children’s genitals and showing theirs. This is normal curiosity. By
age 5 or 6, most children become more modest and private about
dressing and bathing.
Children of this age are aware of marriage and understand living
together, based on their family experience. They may role play about
being married or having a partner while they “play house.” Most young
children talk about marrying and/or living with a person they love when
they get older. Most sex play at this age happens because of curiosity.
Sexuality in preadolescent youth (age 8–12)—Puberty, the time when
the body matures, begins between the ages of 9 and 12 for most children.
Girls begin to grow breast buds and pubic hair as early as 9 or 10. Boys’
development of the penis and testicles usually begins between 10 and 11.
Children become more self-conscious about their bodies at this age and
often feel uncomfortable undressing in front of others, even a same-sex
parent.
Masturbation increases during these years. Preadolescent boys and
girls do not usually have much sexual experience, but they often have
many questions. They usually have heard about sexual intercourse,
homosexuality, rape, and incest, and they want to know more about all
these things. The idea of actually having sexual intercourse, however, is
unpleasant to most preadolescent boys and girls.
Same-gender sexual behavior can occur at this age. Boys and girls
tend to play with friends of the same gender and are likely to explore
sexuality with them. Same-gender sexual behavior is unrelated to a
child’s sexual orientation.
Some group dating occurs at this age. Preadolescents may attend
parties that have guests of both genders, and they may dance and play
kissing games. By age 12 or 13, some young adolescents may pair off
and begin dating and/or “making out.” Young women are usually older
when they begin voluntary sexual intercourse. However, many very young
138
teens do practice sexual behaviors other than vaginal intercourse, such
as petting to orgasm and oral sex.
Sexuality in adolescent youth (age 13–19)—Once youth have
reached puberty and beyond, they experience increased interest in
romantic and sexual relationships and in genital sex behaviors. As youth
mature, they experience strong emotional attachments to romantic
partners and find it natural to express their feelings within sexual
relationships. There is no way to predict how a particular teenager will act
sexually. Overall, most adolescents explore relationships with one
another, fall in and out of love, and participate in sexual intercourse
before the age of 20.
Adult sexuality—Adult sexual behaviors are extremely varied and, in most
cases, remain part of an adult’s life until death. At around age 50, women
experience menopause, which affects their sexuality in that their ovaries
no longer release eggs and their bodies no longer produce estrogen.
78
They may experience several physical changes. Vaginal walls become
thinner and vaginal intercourse may be painful because there is less
vaginal lubrication and the entrance to the vagina becomes smaller. Many
women use estrogen replacement therapy to relieve physical and
emotional side effects of menopause. Use of vaginal lubricants can also
make vaginal intercourse easier. Most women are able to have
pleasurable sexual intercourse and to experience orgasm for their entire
lives.
Adult men also experience some changes in their sexuality, but not at
such a predictable time as with menopause in women. Men’s testicles
slow testosterone production after age 25 or so. Erections may occur
more slowly once testosterone production slows. Men also become less
able to have another erection after an orgasm and may take up to 24
hours to achieve and sustain another erection. The amount of semen
released during ejaculation also decreases, but men are capable of
fathering a baby even when they are in their 80s and 90s. Some older
men develop an enlarged or cancerous prostate gland. If the doctors
deem it necessary to remove the prostate gland, a man’s ability to have
an erection or an orgasm is normally unaffected.
Although adult men and women go through some sexual changes as
they age, they do not lose their desire or their ability for sexual
expression. Even among the very old, the need for touch and intimacy
remains, although the desire and ability to have sexual intercourse may
lessen.
139
THEORIES OF SPIRITUAL DEVELOPMENT THROUGHOUT
THE LIFESPAN
Many models attempt to explain the impact of spirituality and/or religious
beliefs on behavior. Many of them describe this impact along a continuum
as follows, with some individuals changing during their life course and
others remaining at the same point.
Individuals are unwilling to accept a will greater than their own.
Behavior is chaotic, disordered, and reckless. Individuals tend to defy
and disobey, and are extremely egoistic. They lack empathy for others.
Very young children can be at this stage. Adults who do not move beyond
this point in the continuum may engage in criminal activity because they
cannot obey rules.
Individuals have blind faith in authority figures and see the world as
divided simply into good and evil and right and wrong.
Children who learn to obey their parents and other authority figures
move to this point in the continuum. Many “religious” people who have
blind faith in a spiritual being and do not question its existence may also
be at this point. Individuals who are good, law-abiding citizens may never
move further in the continuum.
Scientific skepticism and questioning are critical, because an
individual does not accept things on faith, but only if convinced logically.
Many people working in a scientific and technical field may question
spiritual or supernatural forces because they are difficult to measure or
prove scientifically. Those who do engage in this skepticism move away
from the simple, official doctrines.
The individual starts enjoying the mystery and beauty of nature and
existence.
The individual develops a deeper understanding of good and evil,
forgiveness and mercy, compassion and love. Religiousness and
spirituality differ significantly from other points in the continuum and
things are not accepted on blind faith or out of fear. The individual does
not judge people harshly or seek to inflict punishment on them for their
transgressions. This is the stage of loving others as one loves oneself,
losing attachment to ego, and forgiving enemies.
Basic principles of all models move from the “egocentric,” which are
79
associated particularly with childhood, to “conformist,” and eventually
to “integration” or “universal.”
140
There is a positive relationship between spirituality and overall mental
health, as well as with regard to certain problems or disorders. For
example, there is a positive association between church attendance and
lower levels of depression. Similar relationships have been found
between spirituality and anxiety or stress. There may also be a positive
effect on posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) because religion and
spirituality may be beneficial in dealing with the aftermath of trauma. In
these instances, clients may have religious openness and a readiness to
face existential questions. In addition, traumatic experiences can lead to
a deepening of religion or spirituality.
Those who share the same religious values as clients and their
families may also serve as cohesive support networks. These religious
and spiritual communities can provide tangible assistance in addition to
being psychologically viewed by clients as supportive.
Some of the mechanisms by which spirituality assists include
enhanced coping styles and locus of control, as well as providing social
supports and a social network. Clients who are spiritual may use a more
collaborative approach when coping (i.e., relying on a higher being to
cope with stress), which is associated with the greatest improvement in
mental health. Spirituality may also allow clients to reframe or reinterpret
events that are seen as uncontrollable, in such a way as to make them
less stressful and/or more meaningful.
Lastly, emotions encouraged in many spiritual traditions, including
hope, contentment, love, and forgiveness, may be beneficial to clients in
promoting positive mental health.
THEORIES OF RACIAL, ETHNIC, AND CULTURAL
DEVELOPMENT THROUGHOUT THE LIFESPAN
Ethnicity refers to the idea that one is a member of a particular cultural,
national, or racial group that may share culture, religion, race, language,
or place of origin. Two people can share the same race but have different
ethnicities.
The meaning of race is not fixed; it is related to a particular social,
historical, and geographic context. The way races are classified has
changed in the public mind over time; for example, at one time racial
classifications were based on ethnicity or nationality, religion, or minority
language groups. Today, society classifies people into different races
primarily based on skin color.
141
Cultural identity is often defined as the identity of a group or
culture of an individual who is influenced by their self-identification with
that group or culture. Certain ethnic and racial identities may also bestow
privilege.
Cultural, racial, and ethnic identities are important. They may instill
feelings of shared commitment and values and a sense of belonging that
may otherwise be missing.
Cultural, racial, and ethnic identities are passed from one generation
to the next through customs, traditions, language, religious practice, and
cultural values. Current events, mainstream media, and popular literature
also influence cultural, racial, and ethnic identities.
Cultural, racial, and ethnic identities play a particularly large role
among minority youth because they experience the contrasting and
dominant culture of the majority ethnic group. Youth who belong to the
majority ethnic culture may not even recognize or acknowledge their
cultural, racial, and ethnic identities.
Following is a three-stage model for adolescent cultural and ethnic
80
identity development. These stages do not correspond to specific
ages, but can occur at any time. Individuals may spend their entire lives
at a particular stage.
■ The first stage, unexamined cultural, racial, and ethn
identity, is characterized by a lack of exploration of culture, race, a
ethnicity and cultural, racial, and ethnic differences—they are rath
taken for granted without much critical thinking. This is usually th
stage reserved for childhood when cultural, racial, and ethnic ide
provided by parents, the community, or the media are easily accepte
Children at this stage tend not to be interested in culture, race,
ethnicity and are generally ready to take on the opinions of others.
■ The second stage of the model is referred to as the cultural, racia
and ethnic identity search and is characterized by th
exploration and questioning of culture, race, and ethnicity in order
learn more about them and to understand the implications
belonging. During this stage, there is questioning of where belie
come from and why they are held. For some, this stage may arise fro
a turning point in their lives or from a growing awareness of oth
cultures, races, and ethnicities. It can also be a very emotional time.
142
■ Finally, the third stage of the model is cultural, racial, and ethn
identity achievement. Ideally, people at this stage have a cle
sense of their cultural, racial, and ethnic identity and are able
successfully navigate it in the contemporary world, which
undoubtedly very interconnected and intercultural. The acceptance
cultural, racial, and ethnic identity may play a significant role
important life decisions and choices, influencing attitudes a
behavior. This usually leads to an increase in self-confidence a
positive psychological development.
The classic model of cultural, racial, and ethnic identity development
refers to identity statuses rather than stages, because stages imply a
linear progression of steps that may not occur for all.
■ Preencounter: At this point, the client may not be consciously awa
of culture, race, or ethnicity and how it may affect life.
■ Encounter: A client has an encounter that provokes thought abo
the role of cultural, racial, and ethnic identification in life. This may be
negative or positive experience related to culture, race, and ethnici
For minorities, this experience is often a negative one in which th
experience discrimination for the first time.
■ Immersion–Emersion: After an encounter that forces a client
confront cultural, racial, and ethnic identity, a period of exploratio
follows. A client may search for information and will also learn throug
interaction with others from the same cultural, racial, or ethnic groups
■ Internalization and Commitment: At this point, a client h
developed a secure sense of identity and is comfortable socializi
both within and outside the group with which the person identifies.
THE EFFECTS OF PHYSICAL, MENTAL, AND COGNITIVE
DISABILITIES THROUGHOUT THE LIFESPAN
81
The impacts of disabilities on human development are extremely varied
depending upon the manifestations of the disability and when it occurs
during the life course. Some disabilities are short-term, whereas others
are lifelong. Critical to mitigating the negative impacts is the development
143
of coping skills that strengthen a client’s ability to deal with limitations.
Support (formal and informal) is also critical.
There may also be positive effects of disabilities because familial
bonds may be stronger or individuals may develop skills to compensate
for other tasks that cannot be performed.
Disability is a normal phenomenon in the sense that it exists in all
societies. Although medical explanations remain primary in defining
disability, the history of disability took an important turn in the latter half of
the 20th century that has significantly influenced responses to it. Disability
rights scholars and activists rejected the medical explanation for disability,
since such explanations of permanent deficit did not advance social
justice, equality of opportunity, and rights as citizens. Rather, these
leaders proposed the intolerance and rigidity of social institutions, rather
than medical conditions, as the explanation for disability. Words such as
“inclusion,” “participation,” and “nondiscrimination” were introduced into
the disability literature and reflected the notions that people who did not fit
within the majority were disabled by stigma, prejudice, marginalization,
segregation, and exclusion. This notion of disability requires the
modification of societal structures to include all, rather than “fixing”
individuals with varying abilities.
There must be policies, procedures, regulations, and legislation which
provide accommodations for children and adults with disabilities. These
disabilities may be related to mental and/or physical conditions. These
conditions do not need to be severe or permanent. Social workers must
ensure that these accommodations are available and the rights of those
with disabilities are respected.
THE INTERPLAY OF BIOLOGICAL, PSYCHOLOGICAL,
SOCIAL, AND SPIRITUAL FACTORS
Human development is a lifelong process beginning before birth and
extending to death. At each moment in life, every human being is in a
state of personal evolution. Physical changes largely drive the process,
as our cognitive abilities advance and decline in response to the brain’s
growth in childhood and reduced functioning in old age. Psychosocial–
spiritual development is also significantly influenced by physical growth,
as changing body and brain, together with environment, shape a client’s
identity and relationships with other people.
144
Thus, development is the product of the elaborate interplay of
biological, psychological, social, and spiritual influences. As children
develop physically, gaining greater psychomotor control and increased
brain function, they become more sophisticated cognitively—that is, more
adept at thinking about and acting upon their environment. These
physical and cognitive changes, in turn, allow them to develop
psychosocially and spiritually, forming individual identities and relating
effectively and appropriately with other people.
BASIC HUMAN NEEDS
82
Maslow’s hierarchy of needs implies that clients are motivated to meet
certain needs. When one need is fulfilled, a client seeks to fulfill the next
one, and so on. This hierarchy is often depicted as a pyramid. This five-
stage model can be divided into basic (or deficiency) needs (i.e.,
physiological, safety, social, and esteem) and growth needs (self-
actualization).
1. Deficiency needs—also known as D-Needs
2. Growth needs—also known as “being needs” or B-Needs
Deficiency Needs:
■ Physiological
■ Safety
■ Social
■ Esteem
Maslow called these needs “deficiency needs” because he felt that
these needs arise due to deprivation. The satisfaction of these needs
helps to “avoid” unpleasant feelings or consequence.
Growth Needs:
■ Self-actualization
These needs fall on the highest level of Maslow’s pyramid. They
come from a place of growth rather than from a place of “lacking.”
145
A client must satisfy lower-level basic needs before moving on to
meet higher-level growth needs. After meeting lower levels of needs, a
client can reach the highest level of self-actualization, but few people do
so.
Every client is capable and has the desire to move up the hierarchy
toward a level of self-actualization. Unfortunately, progress is often
disrupted by failure to meet lower level needs. Life experiences, including
divorce and loss of job, may cause a client to fluctuate between levels of
the hierarchy.
Physiological needs: These needs maintain the physical organism.
These are biological needs such as food, water, oxygen, and constant
body temperature. If a person is deprived of these needs, the person will
die.
Safety needs: There is a need to feel safe from harm, danger, or
threat of destruction. Clients need regularity and some predictability.
Social needs: Friendship, intimacy, affection, and love are needed—
from one’s work group, family, friends, or romantic relationships.
Esteem needs: People need a stable, firmly based level of self-
respect and respect from others.
Self-actualization needs: There is a need to be oneself, to act
consistently with whom one is. Self-actualization is an ongoing process. It
involves developing potential, becoming, and being what one is capable
of being. It makes possible true objectivity—dealing with the world as it is,
rather than as one needs it to be. You are free to really do what you want
to do. There are moments when everything is right (peak experience); a
glimmer of what it is like to be complete. One is in a position to find one’s
true calling (i.e., being an artist, writer, and musician). Only 1% of the
population consistently operates at this level.
146
On the examination, Maslow’s hierarchy of needs is often
83
not explicitly asked about, but it can be applied when
asked about the order of prioritizing problems or issues
with a client. A client with an acute medical problem should focus on
getting a medical evaluation first; a victim of domestic violence should
prioritize medical and safety issues; and a refugee must initially meet
basic survival needs (shelter, food, income, clothing, etc.) before working
on fulfilling higher level needs.
THE PRINCIPLES OF ATTACHMENT AND BONDING
Attachment theory originated with the seminal work of John Bowlby.
Bowlby defined attachment as a lasting psychological connectedness
between human beings that can be understood within an evolutionary
context in which a caregiver provides safety and security for a child.
Bowlby suggests that children come into the world biologically
preprogrammed to form attachments with others, because this will help
them to survive. They initially form only one primary attachment
(monotropy) and this attachment figure acts as a secure base for
exploring the world. Disrupting this attachment process can have severe
consequences because the critical period for developing attachment is
within the first 5 years of life.
There is another major theory of attachment that suggests attachment
is a set of learned behaviors. The basis for the learning of attachments is
the provision of food. A child will initially form an attachment to whoever
feeds it. This child learns to associate the feeder (usually the mother) with
the comfort of being fed and, through the process of classical
conditioning, comes to find contact with the mother comforting. The child
also finds that certain behaviors (i.e., crying, smiling) bring desirable
responses from others and through the process of operant conditioning
learns to repeat these behaviors in order to get the things wanted.
In both of these theoretical approaches, parents have important
impacts on their children’s attachment system. Insecure attachment
systems have been linked to psychiatric disorders and can result in
clients reacting in a hostile and rejecting manner as children or adults.
These theories are, however, criticized because there are cultural
influences that may impact on attachment and the ways in which children
147
interact with caregivers. Much of Bowlby and others’ work has not fully
considered these differences.
THE EFFECT OF AGING ON BIOPSYCHOSOCIAL
FUNCTIONING
84
The process of human aging is complex and individualized, causing
biological, psychological, and social changes. Biological aging is
characterized by progressive age-changes in metabolism, organ
functioning, and so on. It is a natural and irreversible process with
biological changes that occur with age in the human body affecting mood,
attitude, and social activity.
Social work with older adults is based on comprehensive
assessments aimed at gathering information about the quality of their
biopsychosocial functioning. Social workers evaluate older adults’
capacity to function effectively in their environments and determine what
resources are needed to improve interpersonal functioning. The purpose
of biopsychosocial assessments is to gather information on functional
capacity or everyday competence—the ability of older adults to care for
themselves, manage their affairs, and live independent, quality lives in
their communities. Assessments may also include diagnostic medical and
physical evaluations.
During the life course, many events occur in older adulthood that can
affect subjective and objective well-being. Some of the most significant
are the onset of voluntary or involuntary retirement, loss of a spouse,
and/or onset of disability. These can have negative effects, including
having a lower income and an increased likelihood of living in poverty at
an older age. A client’s educational level and social class before these
events occurred greatly influence their impacts. Women and those from
ethnic minorities are at the greatest risk for adverse outcomes.
Experiencing loss, especially later in life, has physical, psychological,
and social impacts. Maintaining a proper diet, with exercise, is important
throughout the life course, but especially in older adulthood. Loss can
result in sadness, isolation, and a breakdown in physical or emotional
support that can cause neglect in maintaining a healthy lifestyle and/or
the engagement in substance use and other maladaptive behaviors.
Maintaining social support is essential as loss of family and friends due to
death or disability in older adulthood occurs.
148
Although the negative impacts of aging and/or disability have received
a lot of attention, there can be positive effects as well. Becoming a
grandparent and/or receiving an inheritance are positive events that can
occur in older adulthood. In addition, studies have indicated that there are
some positive effects of caring for adults who are older and/or those with
disabilities. Families’ connections can be strengthened and satisfaction
from helping another can result from fulfilling these caregiving roles.
GERONTOLOGY
Aging is scientifically defined as the accumulation of diverse deleterious
changes occurring in cells and tissues with advancing age that are
responsible for an increased risk of disease and death. Life expectancy is
defined as the average total number of years that a human expects to
live. The lengthening of life expectancy is mainly due to the elimination of
most infectious diseases occurring in youth, better hygiene, and the
adoption of antibiotics and vaccines.
The notion that aging requires treatment is based on the false belief
that becoming old is undesirable. Aging has at times received a negative
connotation and become synonymous with deterioration, approaching
pathology, and death. Society should learn to value old age to the same
extent as it presently values youth.
There are physical changes that naturally occur. In older adulthood,
85
age-related changes in stamina, strength, or sensory perception may
be noticed and will vary based on personal health choices, medical
history, and genetics.
Social workers understand that old age is a time of continued growth
and that older adults contribute significantly to their families, communities,
and society. At the same time, clients face multiple biopsychosocial–
spiritual–cultural challenges as they age: changes in health and physical
abilities; difficulty in accessing comprehensive, affordable, and high-
quality health and behavioral health care; decreased economic security;
increased vulnerability to abuse and exploitation; and loss of meaningful
social roles and opportunities to remain engaged in society. Social
workers are well positioned and trained to support and advocate for older
adults and their caregivers.
PERSONALITY THEORIES
149
Personality theories attempt to explain both personality characteristics
and the way these characteristics develop and impact
behavior/functioning. Theories that have this aim can be categorized as
biological, behavioral, psychodynamic, humanist, or trait focused.
Biological
Biological theories suggest that genetics are responsible for personality.
Research on heritability suggests that there is a link between genetics
and personality traits.
Behavioral
Behavioral theories suggest that personality is a result of interaction
between the individual and the environment. Behavioral theorists study
observable and measurable behaviors, rejecting theories that take
internal thoughts and feelings into account.
Psychodynamic
Psychodynamic theories emphasize the influence of the unconscious
mind and childhood experiences on personality.
Humanist
Humanist theories emphasize the importance of free will and individual
experience in the development of personality. Humanist theorists
emphasized the concept of self-actualization, which is an innate need for
personal growth that motivates behavior.
Trait
Trait theories posit that the personality is made up of a number of broad
traits. A trait is basically a relatively stable characteristic that causes an
individual to behave in certain ways.
FACTORS INFLUENCING SELF-IMAGE (E.G., CULTURE,
RACE, RELIGION/SPIRITUALITY, AGE, DISABILITY,
TRAUMA)
86
Self-image is how clients define themselves, which is often tied to
physical description (i.e., tall, thin), social roles (i.e., mother, student),
150
personal traits (i.e., worthy, generous), and/or existential beliefs (i.e., one
with the world, a spiritual being). It is how clients see themselves.
Self-esteem refers to the extent to which a client accepts or approves
of this definition. Self-esteem always involves a degree of evaluation that
may produce positive or negative feelings. Thus, self-image and self-
esteem are linked throughout the life cycle.
Clearly, age has a profound impact on behavior and attitudes. Most
developmental theorists trace physical, psychosocial, and other changes
across the life course, marking distinctions in these areas by age.
Interestingly, however, although behavior analysts have contributed to
research on aging, the focus has largely been on remedying age-related
deficits rather than a concern with aging as a developmental process.
Thus, although there is much documented that confirms that behavior
changes with advancing years, there is less known about the sources of
those changes.
Age can influence health behaviors, social/emotional patterns,
mobility, cognitive functioning, economic well-being, independence, and
other areas of life. Ensuring that a client’s quality of life is not adversely
impacted by these changes is critical to ensuring the maintenance of a
positive self-image.
Generally, self-esteem is relatively high in childhood, drops during
adolescence, rises gradually throughout adulthood, and then declines
sharply in old age.
Childhood: Young children have relatively high self-esteem, which
gradually declines over childhood. This high self-image may be
because children’s self-views are unrealistically positive. As children
develop cognitively, they begin to base their self-evaluations on
external feedback and social comparisons, and thus form a more
balanced and accurate appraisal of their academic competence,
social skills, attractiveness, and other personal characteristics.
Adolescence: Self-esteem continues to decline during adolescence,
perhaps due to a decrease in body image and other problems
associated with puberty, as well as the increasing ability to think
abstractly coupled with more academic and social challenges.
Adulthood: Self-esteem increases gradually throughout adulthood,
peaking sometime around the late 60s. This increase is tied to
assuming positions of power and status that might promote feelings
151
of self-worth. Adulthood also brings an increasing level of maturity
and adjustment, as well as emotional stability.
Older Adulthood: Self-esteem declines in old age, beginning to drop
around age 70. This decline may be due to loss of employment due
to retirement, loss of a spouse or friends, and/or health problems.
Overall, males and females follow essentially the same course during
the life cycle. However, there are some interesting gender differences.
Although boys and girls report similar levels of self-esteem during
childhood, a gender gap emerges by adolescence, with adolescent boys
having higher self-esteem than adolescent girls. This gender gap persists
throughout adulthood, and then narrows and perhaps even disappears in
old age.
Individuals tend to maintain their ordering relative to one another, with
87
those who have relatively high self-esteem at one point in time tending
to have relatively high self-esteem years later.
Research on self-image indicates that persons with disabilities may or
may not suffer loss of self as they go through a process in which they try
to operate in the same manner as they did before their impairments or as
typically as possible. Central to self-image of clients’ ability to view
themselves as people first and their disabilities as just one characteristic
of their personalities. Hence, impairment is reduced to, or interpreted as,
one characteristic that is different among several similar characteristics in
a person.
BODY IMAGE AND ITS IMPACT (E.G., IDENTITY, SELF-
ESTEEM, RELATIONSHIPS, HABITS)
Body image is the way one perceives and relates to ones body, and how
one thinks that one is seen by others.
Body image affects nearly everyone from time to time. Body image is
not only influenced by the perceptions of others, but by the media and
cultural forces as well. Senses are bombarded by an onslaught of mixed
messages about how one “should” look or think about one’s body.
Having a healthy body image is a key to well-being, both mentally and
physically. A positive body image means that, most of the time, a client
has a realistic perception of, and feels comfortable with, one’s looks.
Factors associated with positive body image:
152
■ Acceptance and appreciation of natural body shape and bo
differences
■ Self-worth not tied to appearance
■ Confidence in and comfort with body
■ An unreasonable amount of time is not spent worrying about foo
weight, or calories
■ Judgment of others is not made related to their body weight, shap
and/or eating or exercise habits
■ Knowing physical appearance says very little about character an
value as a person
Factors of negative body image:
■ Distorted perception of shape or body parts, unlike what they really a
■ Believing only other people are attractive and that body size or sha
is a sign of personal failure
■ Feeling body doesn’t measure up to family, social, or media ideals
■ Ashamed, self-conscious, and anxious about body
■ Uncomfortable and awkward in body
■ Constant negative thoughts about body and comparisons to others
Some possible effects of a negative body image:
88
■ Emotional distress
■ Low self-esteem
■ Unhealthy dieting habits
■ Anxiety
■ Depression
■ Eating disorders
■ Social withdrawal or isolation
153
PARENTING SKILLS AND CAPACITIES
Although there are very few actual cause-and-effect links between
specific actions of parents and later behavior of children, there are four
distinct parenting styles that seem to impact behavior later in life.
Authoritarian Parenting
Children are expected to follow the strict rules established by the parents.
Failure to follow such rules usually results in punishment. Authoritarian
parents fail to explain the reasoning behind these rules.
Authoritarian parenting styles generally lead to those who are
obedient and proficient, but are lower in happiness, social competence,
and self-esteem.
Authoritative Parenting
Like authoritarian parents, those with an authoritative parenting style
establish rules and guidelines that their children are expected to follow.
However, this parenting style is much more democratic. Authoritative
parents are responsive to their children and willing to listen to questions.
When children fail to meet the expectations, these parents are more
nurturing and forgiving rather than punishing.
Authoritative parenting styles generally tend to result in those who are
happy, capable, and successful.
Permissive Parenting
Permissive parents have very few demands on their children. These
parents rarely discipline their children and are generally nurturing and
communicative with their children, often taking on the status of a friend
more than that of a parent.
Permissive parenting often results in children who rank low in
happiness and self-regulation, experiencing problems with authority and
tending to perform poorly in school.
Uninvolved Parenting
89
An uninvolved parenting style is characterized by few demands, low
responsiveness, and little communication. Although these parents fulfill
basic needs, they are generally detached from their children’s lives.
154
Those who have experienced uninvolved parenting styles rank lowest
across all life domains. They tend to lack self-control, have low self-
esteem, and are less competent than their peers.
BASIC PRINCIPLES OF HUMAN GENETICS
Social workers in all settings must educate themselves about the process
of genetic inheritance and understand the primary reasons that clients
seek genetic testing and counseling. Minimally, a social worker must
understand the types of genetic conditions, including single gene
disorders, chromosome anomalies, and multifactorial disorders, and the
effect of harmful environmental toxins on development. Furthermore, an
understanding of the patterns of inheritance between generations
(autosomal dominant, autosomal recessive, and X-linked recessive) is
essential in working with families.
It is important that social workers be educated about the specific
application of skills to genetic cases. Social workers are already trained to
view people from a biopsychosocial–spiritual–cultural perspective. In
order to identify the patterns of disease in a family, a social worker may
need to develop a genogram as part of the assessment.
Because a client’s genetic test produces information about the whole
family, the biology of a genetic condition must be thoroughly understood
and explained to a client and the client’s family in order to make informed
decisions about whether or not to be tested. Sensitivity to the principle of
self-determination is essential in the process of informing clients and
family members.
Social workers must take care to ensure that clients are fully informed
about all aspects of genetic testing. Social workers should provide
counseling before and after the decision to have a genetic test and after
the test itself.
THE FAMILY LIFE CYCLE
The emotional and intellectual stages from childhood to retirement as a
member of a family are called the “family life cycle.” In each stage, clients
face challenges in family life that allow the building or gaining of new
skills.
Not everyone passes through these stages smoothly. Situations such
as severe illness, financial problems, or the death of a loved one can
155
have an effect. If skills are not learned in one stage, they can be learned
in later stages.
Stage 1: Family of origin experiences
Main tasks
■ Maintaining relationships with parents, siblings, and peers
■ Completing education
■ Developing the foundations of a family life
Stage 2: Leaving home
Main tasks
90
■ Differentiating self from family of origin and parents and develo
adult-to-adult relationships with parents
■ Developing intimate peer relationships
■ Beginning work, developing work identity, and financial independen
Stage 3: Premarriage stage
Main tasks
■ Selecting partners
■ Developing a relationship
■ Deciding to establish own home with someone
Stage 4: Childless couple stage
Main tasks
■ Developing a way to live together both practically and emotionally
■ Adjusting relationships with families of origin and peers to inc
partner
Stage 5: Family with young children
Main tasks
■ Realigning family system to make space for children
■ Adopting and developing parenting roles
156
■ Realigning relationships with families of origin to include parenting
grandparenting roles
■ Facilitating children to develop peer relationships
Stage 6: Family with adolescents
Main tasks
■ Adjusting parent–child relationships to allow adolescents m
autonomy
■ Adjusting family relationships to focus on midlife relationship
career issues
■ Taking on responsibility of caring for families of origin
Stage 7: Launching children
Main tasks
■ Resolving midlife issues
■ Negotiating adult-to-adult relationships with children
■ Adjusting to living as a couple again
■ Adjusting to including in-laws and grandchildren within the family c
■ Dealing with disabilities and death in the family of origin
Stage 8: Later family life
Main tasks
■ Coping with physiological decline in self and others
■ Adjusting to children taking a more central role in family maintenan
■ Valuing the wisdom and experience of the elderly
■ Dealing with loss of spouse and peers
■ Preparing for death, life review, and reminiscence
Mastering the skills and milestones of each stage allows successful
91
movement from one stage of development to the next. If not mastered,
clients are more likely to have difficulty with relationships and future
transitions. Family life cycle theory suggests that successful transitioning
157
may also help to prevent disease and emotional or stress-related
disorders.
The stress of daily living, coping with a chronic medical condition, or
other life crises can disrupt the normal life cycle. Ongoing stress or a
crisis can delay the transition to the next phase of life.
MODELS OF FAMILY LIFE EDUCATION IN SOCIAL WORK
PRACTICE
Family life education aims to strengthen individual and family life through
a family perspective. Social workers are well suited to work with a client
within the family context, which is essential for such a model.
Much of family life education is delivered through parenting classes,
premarriage education, marriage enrichment programs, and/or family
financial planning courses. All of these activities focus on improving a
client’s quality of life individually and, equally as important, within the
client’s family unit.
Social workers use a strengths perspective, as well as their
knowledge of human development, systems and social role theories, and
ecological or “person-in-environment (PIE)” influences, when engaging in
family life education.
When conducting family life education, a social worker must be aware
of the social worker’s own cultural values and norms with regard to
material covered and not impose these beliefs on others or be
judgmental.
THE IMPACT OF AGING PARENTS ON ADULT CHILDREN
For social workers, there is an increasing need to provide services and
supports to adult children as they become caregivers for their parents. In
these new roles, adult children may need direct assistance with
maintaining adequate nutrition, decent housing, economic stability, and
access to appropriate medical care for both their parents and themselves.
However, of even greater concern to adult children are a multitude of
psychosocial stressors that come with the transitioning of roles and the
expectations placed upon them. In these instances, there are often
blurred familial roles, boundaries, and expectations.
The responsibility of caring for the aging parent often falls to adult
children who are generally accepting of this responsibility. Their reasons
158
for doing so may include fulfilling expectations, religious beliefs, sense of
duty, financial rewards, altruism, and/or respect/love.
Adult children may need the assistance of social workers due to
feelings of guilt, fatigue, sadness, anxiety, and/or frustration. These
feelings are compounded when the assistance of adult children is not
appreciated by their aging parents. Often adult children need help getting
other family members to share the burden and/or getting their parents’
affairs in order.
Seeing parents grow old forces adult children to confront feelings about
their own mortality. Feelings can include denial, hostility, resentment,
hatred of their parents or themselves, helplessness, fear, anger, and
92
sadness. Clients may have any or all of these emotions at one time
and the emotions may vary in range and intensity. In some instances,
adult children may feel in a bind and begin to seek reasons for reducing
their commitment to their older family members. A social worker can
provide help in sorting out these feelings, finding their roots, and
reframing them into empowerment, opportunity, and choice.
Clients may want help in areas such as communication (i.e.,
understanding requests for assistance/resistance of their parents), self-
care (i.e., developing coping skills and attending to their own needs),
and/or resource identification (i.e., finding services to assist in meeting
child/parent needs).
Social workers need to be sensitive to client needs in these situations,
since the transforming role of child to adult child of aging parents will
most likely leave a client on shaky ground, especially if the role was not
expected or anticipated. A social worker may need to act as a consultant,
advocate, case manager, catalyst, broker, mediator, facilitator, instructor,
mobilizer, and/or clinician in these situations as the family dynamic is
complex and the needs are great.
SYSTEMS AND ECOLOGICAL PERSPECTIVES AND
THEORIES
A system is a whole comprising component parts that work together.
Applied to social work, systems theory views human behavior through
larger contexts, such as members of families, communities, and broader
society.
Important to this theory is the concept that when one thing changes
within a system, the whole system is affected.
159
Systems tend toward equilibrium and can have closed or open
boundaries.
Applications to Social Work
1. Social workers need to understand interactions between the micr
mezzo, and macro levels.
2. Problems at one part of a system may be manifested at another.
3. Ecomaps and genograms can help to understand system dynamics.
4. Understanding “person-in-environment” is essential to identifyin
barriers or opportunities for change.
5. Problems and change are viewed within larger contexts.
Some System Theory Terms
Closed system Uses up its energy and dies
Differentiation Becoming specialized in structure
and function
Entropy Closed, disorganized, stagnant;
using up available energy
Equifinality Arriving at the same end from
different beginnings
Homeostasis Steady state
Obtaining resources from the
93
Input
environment that are necessary to
attain the goals of the system
Exchange of energy and resources
Negative entropy
between systems that promote
growth and transformation
Open system Output Subsystem A system with cross-boundary
exchange
A product of the system that exports
to the environment
A major component of a system
made up of two or more
interdependent components that
interact in order to attain their own
160
Suprasystem
Throughput
purpose(s) and the purpose(s) of
the system in which they are
embedded
An entity that is served by a number
of component systems organized in
interacting relationships
Energy that is integrated into the
system so it can be used by the
system to accomplish its goals
STRENGTHS-BASED AND RESILIENCE THEORIES
The strengths perspective is based on the assumption that clients have
the capacity to grow, change, and adapt (humanistic approach).
Clients also have the knowledge that is important in defining and solving
their problems (clients or families are experts about their own lives and
situations); they are resilient and survive and thrive despite difficulties.
Strength is any ability that helps an individual (or family) to confront
and deal with a stressful life situation and to use the challenging situation
as a stimulus for growth. Individual strengths include, but are not limited
to, cognitive abilities, coping mechanisms, personal attributes,
interpersonal skills, or external resources. Families may have other
strengths such as kinship bonds, community supports, religious
connections, flexible roles, strong ethnic traditions, and so on.
Strengths vary from one situation to another and are contextual. What
may be an appropriate strength or coping mechanism in one situation
may not be appropriate in another. Ideally, in a given situation, a client
selects an appropriate way to cope by drawing from a repertoire of coping
mechanisms or strengths. The appropriateness of a particular coping
mechanism may vary according to life course stage, developmental
tasks, kinds of stressors, situation, and so on. Having a variety of coping
mechanisms and resources enables flexibility in the way a client copes
with stresses.
The strengths perspective focuses on understanding clients (or
families) on the basis of their strengths and resources (internal and
external) and mobilizing the resources to improve their situations. There
is a systematic assessment of all the strengths and resources available to
meet desired goals.
Methods to enhance strengths include:
161
■ Collaboration and partnership between a social worker and client
■ Creating opportunities for learning or displaying competencies
■ Environmental modification—environment is both a resource an
target of intervention
A social worker should always use a strengths perspective when
94
interacting with clients. Central to this perspective is the use of
supportive communication throughout the problem-solving process. A
social worker should be instilling hope in a client when engaging so a
client believes that change is possible.
Supportive techniques include ensuring that the positives are included
in an assessment of a client’s situation. It also includes using positive
phrasing when communicating with a client or on a client’s behalf.
Opportunities for growth and development should be seen in the face of
adversity and challenges. A social worker should always take a “glass
half full” approach.
Supportive techniques also require a nonjudgmental attitude. A client
should not be fearful of being judged, feel condemned, or retaliated
against for expressing viewpoints or acting in a certain way.
Empathic communication is an essential supportive technique. A
client should feel that a social worker understands what the client is going
through. A social worker should be warm and friendly, treating a client as
a valuable partner in the problem-solving process. Making clients realize
their quality attributes helps boost their self image.
THE DYNAMICS AND EFFECTS OF LOSS, SEPARATION,
AND GRIEF
Loss, separation, and grief are expressed differently, but it is essential
that they involve mourning to allow healing. Loss, separation, and grief
can be caused by death, disability, divorce, relocation, family conflict, and
other life events. Loss is universal, but the reactions to it are not.
Mourning is the expression of grief such as crying, talking to others,
sharing stories, looking at photos, etc. Grief is not only expressed through
emotion. It includes physical, behavioral, cognitive, social, and spiritual
reactions. Responses to loss, separation, and grief are influenced by
gender, culture, race, spirituality, and ethnicity. Instead of encouraging
mourning, people often discourage showing emotions associated with
162
loss, separation, and grief by telling others to “be strong.” While people
mourn in different ways, there are needs which exist such as:
■ Acknowledging the reality of the loss or separation
■ Embracing the pain of the loss
■ Remembering the relationships that existed
■ Developing a new self-identity
■ Searching for meaning
■ Receiving ongoing support from others
There is growth which can result from grief, but it is often not readily
apparent and cannot be achieved immediately. There is no predefined
timeframe for grief as it is processed differently by each person. Grief is a
reaction to any loss, not just death. Emotional reactions can include but
are not limited to sadness, guilt, loneliness, and yearning. Sometimes the
emotions associated with grief can be intense and at other times, they
can wane. However, they can return quickly and strongly, often without
warning. There are often mourning rituals and customs around loss,
separation, and grief.
Although most people retain or return to the levels of functioning prior
95
to the loss, separation, or grief, a significant proportion struggle with
protracted grief. Grieving can be thought of as a developmental process
with phases which focus on reacting (focusing on safety, trust, and
survival), reconstructing (focusing on validation and understanding), and
reorienting (focusing on self-reinvention), though the process is not
always linear.
96
163
CHAPTER 2
Human Behavior in the Social
Environment
PERSON-IN-ENVIRONMENT (PIE) THEORY
97
Social psychology focuses on the way in which social interaction
influences the behavior of others. Ecological perspectives emphasize the
nature of clients’ interactions within their physical and sociocultural
surroundings. Social ecology attempts to understand the interactions
within the social, institutional, and cultural contexts of people-environment
relationships. This approach adopts a systemic approach in focusing on
the interdependencies of social systems.
All of these fields of study and perspectives recognize the importance
of social context on behavior. Humans are social beings. Life depends on
others. Infants are unable to care for themselves. Their survival depends
on others. Clients develop and learn about the world through the filter of
other people. Social interaction is essential to both survival and happiness.
Social workers must understand a systems perspective and the
interplay between biological, psychological, and social processes. They
must also understand contexts and conditions that inhibit and promote
certain human behaviors and/or behavioral change.
The PIE perspective highlights the importance of understanding
individual behavior in light of the environmental contexts in which a client
lives and acts. The perspective has historical roots in the social work
profession.
The PIE classification system was developed as an alternative to the
commonly used disease and moral models (i.e., DSM, International
Statistical Classification of Diseases and Related Health Problems [ICD],
civil or penal codes) to implement social work philosophy and area of
expertise. PIE is client-centered, rather than agency-centered.
164
The PIE system is field-tested and examines social role functioning,
the environment, mental health, and physical health.
FAMILY DYNAMICS AND FUNCTIONING AND THE EFFECTS
ON INDIVIDUALS, FAMILIES, GROUPS, ORGANIZATIONS,
AND COMMUNITIES
Family dynamics are the patterns of relating or interactions between family
members. Each family system and its dynamics are unique, although there
are some common patterns. All families have some helpful and some
unhelpful dynamics.
Even where there is little or no present contact with family, there is
98
almost always an influence on a client by dynamics in previous years.
Family dynamics often have a strong influence on the way individuals see
themselves, others, and the world, and influence their relationships, their
behaviors, and their well-being.
An understanding of the impact of family dynamics on a client’s self-
perception may help social workers pinpoint and respond to the driving
forces behind her or his current needs.
Healthy functioning is characterized by:
■ Treating each family member as an individual
■ Having regular routines and structure
■ Being connected to extended family, friends, and the community
■ Having realistic expectations
■ Spending quality time, which is characterized by fun, relaxed, a
conflict-free interactions
■ Ensuring that members take care of their own needs and not just t
family needs
■ Helping one another through example and direct assistance
Family dynamics significantly impact on a client’s biological,
psychological, and social functioning in both positive and negative ways.
Having a close-knit and supportive family provides emotional support,
ensures economic well-being, and increases overall health. However, the
165
opposite is also true. When family life is characterized by stress and
conflict, well-being can be poor.
Social support is one of the main ways that family positively impacts
well-being. Social relationships, such as those found in close families,
have been demonstrated to decrease the likelihood of negative outcomes,
such as chronic disease, disability, mental illness, and death.
Though good familial relations and social support serve as protective
factors and improve overall well-being and health, studies have shown that
not all familial relations positively impact these areas. Problematic and
nonsupportive familial interactions have a negative impact. For example,
growing up in an unsupported, neglectful, or violent home is associated
with poor physical health and development.
THE DYNAMICS OF INTERPERSONAL RELATIONSHIPS
Family theory provides a theoretical and therapeutic base for dealing with
family-related situations; it is also useful in understanding and managing
individual problems by determining the extent to which such problems are
related to family issues. A family systems approach argues that in order to
understand a family system, a social worker must look at the family as a
whole, rather than focusing on its members.
People do not exist in a vacuum. They live, play, go to school, and
work with other people. Most anthropologists agree that, next to their
peculiar tendency to think and use tools, one of the distinguishing
characteristics of human beings is that they are social creatures. The
social group that seems to be most universal and pervasive in the way it
shapes human behavior is the family. For social workers, the growing
awareness of the crucial impact of families on clients has led to the
development of family systems theory.
Family systems theory searches for the causes of behavior, not in the
99
individual alone, but in the interactions among the members of a group.
The basic rationale is that all parts of the family are interrelated. Further,
the family has properties of its own that can be known only by looking at
the relationships and interactions among all members.
The family systems approach is based on several basic assumptions:
■ Each family is more than a sum of its members.
■ Each family is unique, due to the infinite variations in person
characteristics and cultural and ideological styles.
166
■ A healthy family has flexibility, consistent structure, and effecti
exchange of information.
■ The family is an interactional system whose component parts ha
constantly shifting boundaries and varying degrees of resistance
change.
■ Families must fulfill a variety of functions for each member, bo
collectively and individually, if each member is to grow and develop.
■ Families strive for a sense of balance or homeostasis.
■ Negative feedback loops are those patterns of interaction that mainta
stability or constancy while minimizing change. Negative feedback loo
help to maintain homeostasis. Positive feedback loops, in contrast, a
patterns of interaction that facilitate change or movement toward eith
growth or dissolution.
■ Families are seen as being goal oriented. The concept of equifinali
refers to the ability of the family system to accomplish the same goa
through different routes.
■ The concept of hierarchies describes how families organize themselv
into various smaller units or subsystems that are comprised by t
larger family system. When the members or tasks associated with ea
subsystem become blurred with those of other subsystems, famili
have been viewed as having difficulties. For example, when a ch
becomes involved in marital issues, difficulties often emerge that requ
intervention.
■ Boundaries occur at every level of the system and betwe
subsystems. Boundaries influence the movement of people and the flo
of information into and out of the system. Some families have very op
boundaries where members and others are allowed to freely come a
go without much restriction; in other families, there are tight restrictio
on where family members can go and who may be brought into t
family system. Boundaries also regulate the flow of information in
family. In more closed families, the rules strictly regulate wh
information may be discussed and with whom. In contrast, informatio
may flow more freely in families that have more permeable boundaries
■ The concept of interdependence is critical in the study of fam
systems. Individual family members and the subsystems comprised
167
the family system are mutually influenced by and are mutua
dependent upon one another. What happens to one family member,
what one family member does, influences other family members.
Genograms are diagrams of family relationships beyond a family tree
allowing a social worker and client to visualize hereditary patterns and
psychological factors. They include annotations about the medical
100
history and major personality traits of each family member. Genograms
help uncover intergenerational patterns of behavior, marriage choices,
family alliances and conflicts, the existence of family secrets, and other
information that will shed light on a family’s present situation.
INDICATORS AND DYNAMICS OF ABUSE AND NEGLECT
THROUGHOUT THE LIFESPAN
There are various forms of abuse and neglect: physical abuse (infliction
of physical injury); sexual abuse (inappropriate exposure or sexual
contact, activity, or behavior without consent); psychological abuse
(emotional/verbal/mental injury); and neglect (failing to meet physical,
emotional, or other needs).
Different forms of abuse occur separately, but are often seen in
combinations. Psychological abuse almost always accompanies other
forms of abuse.
Indicators and Dynamics of Sexual Abuse
Physical or anatomical signs/injuries associated with the genital and rectal
areas are signs of physical or sexual abuse. Behavioral signs include any
extreme changes in behavior, including regression, fears and anxieties,
withdrawal, sleep disturbances, and/or recurrent nightmares. If the victim is
a child, the child may also show an unusual interest in sexual matters or
know sexual information inappropriate for the child’s age group. Sexual
promiscuity, sexual victimization, and prostitution can also be signs.
Some factors influencing the effect of sexual abuse include:
■ Age of the victim (at time of abuse and time of assessment)
■ Extent and duration of sexual abuse
■ Relationship of offender to victim
168
■ Reaction of others to the abuse
■ Other life experiences
Immediately after disclosing the abuse, an individual is at risk for:
■ Disbelief by others (especially if victim is a child or perpetrator is
spouse/partner of an adult)
■ Being rejected by others
■ Being blamed for the abuse and the consequences of disclosing t
sexual abuse
For a child, one of the most significant factors contributing to
adjustment after sexual abuse is the level of parental support.
Some of the effects of sexual abuse can be:
■ Aversive feelings about sex; overvaluing sex; sexual identity problem
and/or hypersexual behaviors
■
Feelings of shame and guilt or feeling responsible for the
101
abuse, which are reflected in self-destructive behaviors (such as
substance abuse, self-mutilation, suicidal ideation and gestures, and
acts that aim to provoke punishment)
■ Lack of trust, unwillingness to invest in others; involvement in exploiti
relationships; angry and acting-out behaviors
■ Perceived vulnerability and victimization; phobias; sleep and eati
problems
Indicators and Dynamics of Psychological Abuse and Neglect
Psychological abuse/neglect is sustained, repetitive, and inappropriate
behavior aimed at threatening, isolating, discrediting, belittling, teasing,
humiliating, bullying, confusing, and/or ignoring. Psychological
abuse/neglect can be seen in constant criticism, belittling, teasing, ignoring
or withholding of praise or affection, and placing excessive or
unreasonable demands, including expectations above what is appropriate.
It can impact intelligence, memory, recognition, perception, attention,
imagination, and moral development. Individuals who have been
psychologically abused are likely to be fearful, withdrawn, and/or resentful,
169
distressed, and despairing. They are likely to feel unloved, worthless, and
unwanted, or only valued in meeting another’s needs.
Those who are victims of psychological abuse and neglect often:
■ Avoid eye contact and experience deep loneliness, anxiety, and/
despair
■ Have a flat and superficial way of relating, with little empathy towa
others
■ Have a lowered capacity to engage appropriately with others
■ Engage in bullying, disruptive, or aggressive behaviors toward others
■ Engage in self-harming and/or self-destructive behaviors (i.e., cuttin
physical aggression, reckless behavior showing a disregard for self a
safety, drug taking)
Indicators and Dynamics of Physical Abuse and Neglect
Most physical abuse and neglect occur within the family by those who are
known to the victim. Physical abuse and neglect are also more common in
families living in poverty and/or those with drug or alcohol problems.
Neglect can include physical neglect (failing to provide food, clothing,
shelter, or other physical necessities), emotional neglect (failing to provide
love, comfort, or affection), and/or medical neglect (failing to provide
needed medical care).
The major reasons for physical abuse and neglect are feelings of
isolation, stress, and frustration by the perpetrator. There is often a lack of
coping skills to address feelings of frustration and anger. Support groups
and social work services are helpful first steps to diminish the isolation or
frustration that fuel physical abuse and neglect. As many perpetrators
were themselves victims of physical abuse and neglect as children, they
are in need of support to confront, address, and heal wounds in order to
ensure that the cycle of abuse and neglect is not perpetuated.
Physical abuse is defined as nonaccidental trauma or physical injury
caused by punching, beating, kicking, biting, or burning. It is the most
visible form of abuse because there are usually physical signs.
With a child, physical abuse can result from inappropriate or excessive
102
physical discipline.
Indicators of physical abuse include:
■ Unexplained bruises or welts on the face, lips, mouth, torso, bac
170
buttocks, or thighs, sometimes reflecting the shape of the article used
inflict them (electric cord, belt buckle, etc.)
■ Unexplained burns from a cigar or cigarette, especially on soles, palm
back, or buttocks—sometimes patterned like an electric burner, iron,
similar
■ Unexplained fractures to the skull, nose, or facial structure
■ Unexplained lacerations or abrasions to the mouth, lips, gums, eye
and/or external genitalia
Behavioral indicators include being wary of individuals (parent or
caretaker if a child is being abused) and behavioral extremes
(aggressiveness or withdrawal), as well as fear related to reporting injury.
THE EFFECTS OF PHYSICAL, SEXUAL, AND
PSYCHOLOGICAL ABUSE ON INDIVIDUALS, FAMILIES,
GROUPS, ORGANIZATIONS, AND COMMUNITIES
Abuse and neglect have both immediate and long-term consequences.
The impacts are often influenced by various factors including the extent
and type of abuse or neglect, whether it was continual or infrequent, the
age at which it occurred, the relationship to the perpetrator (if abuse), and
how the abuse or neglect was discovered and addressed upon disclosure.
Client personality traits, inner strength, and support systems also influence
the effects.
For many, the impacts of abuse and neglect will not be immediately
evident. Physical injuries, if there are any, are usually temporary. The more
damaging and lasting impacts are those that result from impaired
language, cognitive, and physical development due to the abuse and
neglect. Children who have been abused and neglected are at risk of
academic problems and school failure due to difficulty following rules,
being respectful, staying in their seats and keeping on-task, temper
tantrums, and/or difficult peer relationships.
In addition, social and emotional problems, poor relationships,
substance use and dependency, risky or violent behaviors, and
delinquency are manifestations of abuse and neglect. The psychological
consequences of abuse and neglect include isolation, fear, inability to trust,
low self-esteem, anxiety, depression, and hopelessness. These difficulties
171
can lead to relationship problems and the possibility of antisocial
behavioral traits.
It is important to note that not all those who have been abused and
neglected will experience physical, behavioral, and/or psychological
problems—though they are more likely. Thus, a lack of these problems
should not be used as evidence that abuse or neglect did not occur.
THE CHARACTERISTICS OF PERPETRATORS OF ABUSE,
NEGLECT, AND EXPLOITATION
Many individuals with these characteristics do not commit acts of abuse.
However, some factors are more likely to be present in those who commit
abusive acts. Thus, having one of these risk factors does not mean
103
that an individual will become an abuser, but an abuser is likely to have
one or more of these risk factors.
A past history of violent behavior is the best predictor of
future violence. Each prior act of violence increases the chance of
future episodes of violence. In addition, those who suffered some form of
abuse as children are more likely to be perpetrators of abuse as adults.
Risk factors include:
1. History of owning weapons and using them against others
2. Criminal history; repetitive antisocial behavior
3. Drug and alcohol use (substance use is associated with the mo
violent crimes)
4. Psychiatric disorder with coexisting substance abuse
5. Certain psychiatric symptoms such as psychosis, inten
suspiciousness, anger, and/or unhappiness
6. Personality disorders (borderline and antisocial personality disorders)
7. History of impulsivity; low frustration tolerance; recklessness; inability
tolerate criticism; entitlement
8. Angry affect without empathy for others—high anger scores associat
with increased chance of violence
9. Environmental stressors: lower socioeconomic status or poverty; jo
termination
172
A social worker should take all reports of abuse and all threats for harm
seriously.
A social worker can distinguish between static and dynamic risk
factors.
Static risk factors: These are factors that cannot be changed by
interventions such as past history of violent behavior or demographic
information.
Dynamic risk factors: These are factors that can be changed by
interventions such as change in living situation, treatment of psychiatric
symptoms, abstaining from drug and alcohol use, access to weapons, and
so on. Each client presents with a unique set of risk factors that require an
individualized plan.
Some of the risk factors include the following:
■ Stressors: history of abuse; isolated with lack of social supports; lo
sense of self-competence and self-esteem; financial problems
■ Poor skills: rigid, authoritarian; low intelligence quotient (IQ); poor se
control; poor communication, problem solving, and interpersonal skills
■ Family issues: marital discord, imbalanced relationship with mari
partner (dominant or noninvolved); domestic violence; substance abus
The victim is often blamed for the abuse by the perpetrator.
Interventions to reduce dynamic risk factors include:
■ Pharmacological interventions
■ Substance use treatment
■ Psychosocial interventions
■ Removal of weapons
■ Increased level of supervision
THE EFFECTS OF LIFE EVENTS, STRESSORS, AND
CRISES ON INDIVIDUALS, FAMILIES, GROUPS,
ORGANIZATIONS, AND COMMUNITIES
104
Crisis is an essential component in the understanding of human growth
and development. It has important implications for quality of life and
173
subjective well-being. Crisis situations are viewed as unusual, mostly
negative events that tend to disrupt the normal life of a person.
A crisis is an upset to a steady state. When a stressful event becomes
a crisis, the individual or family is vulnerable and feels mounting anxiety,
tension, and disequilibrium. A precipitating cause of a crisis does not have
to be a major event. It may be the “last straw” in a series of events that
exceed a client’s ability to cope.
An individual or family, at this point, may be emotionally overtaxed,
hopeless, and incapable of effective functioning or making good choices
and decisions. The person or family is at a “critical turning point” of coping
effectively or not effectively.
The way in which life crises are addressed—whether surviving trauma,
parental divorce, or a personal loss—has a very significant role to play in
determining quality of life. When crises are understood, dealt with, and
overcome, clients emerge as healthier and happier.
Crisis situations are viewed as unusual, mostly negative life events that
tend to disrupt typical functioning. The concept of crises is an essential
component in the understanding of human growth and development.
Erickson’s theory of psychosocial development suggests that crises and
major life transitions are similar in their components, though they vary in
their degree and intensity.
It is difficult to avoid crises and the ways in which they are handled is
significant in determining subsequent quality of life. The same life events
can strengthen the mutual ties of one family and leave another ready to
collapse.
Crises can result from family problems, domestic violence, separation
and divorce, addictions, financial distress, illness, and/or death. According
to systems theory, a life event or stress-producing situation for a client will
result in impacts to family as well.
Family crises are disruptions in families’ usual patterns of functioning.
Families in crisis find that their usual ways of coping or problem solving do
not work; as a result, they feel vulnerable, anxious, and overwhelmed.
Family members may have difficulty thinking clearly, dwell on meaningless
activities, express hostility or numbness, be impulsive or dependent,
and/or feel incompetent.
Families are thrust into crises when more than one of the following
occurs:
■ They experience a stress-producing situation.
■ They have difficulty coping.
174
■ They show chronic difficulty meeting basic family responsibilities.
■ They lack sources of support.
These negative life events are not always the causes of crises.
105
Positive events, such as marriages or job promotions, can also trigger
crises as individuals may move out of their family homes or have
increased employment demands that impact the functioning of their family
units.
Crises are time-limited and can be characterized by the following
phases that are not necessarily sequential or discrete:
1. Life event occurs.
2. Life event is seen as threatening.
3. Family responds in a disorganized manner.
4. Family searches for a solution.
5. Family adopts new coping strategies.
Crises present opportunities for positive change, and social workers
should work with families toward such change. Crises help families
discover and strengthen problem-solving skills. During a period of intense
crisis, when usual methods of coping fail, families may be open to learning
new problem-solving approaches. The goal is to resolve crises
constructively and better prepare families for their next challenges. Quick,
highly active responses by social workers are essential during crises to
mitigate negative effects.
THE IMPACT OF STRESS, TRAUMA, AND VIOLENCE
Emotional and psychological trauma is the result of extraordinarily stressful
events that destroy a sense of security, making a client feel helpless and
vulnerable in a dangerous world.
Traumatic experiences often involve a threat to life or safety, but any
situation that leaves a client feeling overwhelmed and alone
can be traumatic, even if it does not involve physical harm. It
is not the objective facts that determine whether an event is traumatic, but
a subjective emotional experience of the event.
175
An event will most likely lead to emotional or psychological
trauma if:
■ It happened unexpectedly
■ There was not preparation for it
■ There is a feeling of having been powerless to prevent it
■ It happens repeatedly
■ Someone was intentionally cruel
■ It happened in childhood
Emotional and psychological trauma can be caused by one-time
events or ongoing, relentless stress.
Not all potentially traumatic events lead to lasting emotional and
psychological damage. Some clients rebound quickly from even the most
tragic and shocking experiences. Others are devastated by experiences
that, on the surface, appear to be less upsetting.
A number of risk factors make clients susceptible to emotional and
106
psychological trauma. Clients are more likely to be traumatized by a
stressful experience if they are already under a heavy stress load or have
recently suffered a series of losses.
Clients are also more likely to be traumatized by a new situation if they
have been traumatized before—especially if the earlier trauma occurred in
childhood. Experiencing trauma in childhood can have a severe and long-
lasting effect. Children who have been traumatized see the world as a
frightening and dangerous place. When childhood trauma is not resolved,
this fundamental sense of fear and helplessness carries over into
adulthood, setting the stage for further trauma.
CRISIS INTERVENTION THEORIES
A “crisis” is an acute disruption of psychological homeostasis in which a
client’s usual coping mechanisms fail and there is evidence of distress and
functional impairment. While there are many theories used to explain and
address crises, there are seven critical stages through which clients
typically pass on the road to crisis stabilization, resolution, and mastery.
176
These stages are essential, sequential, and sometimes overlapping in the
process of crisis intervention:
1. Plan and conduct a thorough biopsychosocial–spiritual–cultural an
lethality/imminent danger assessment.
A social worker must conduct a biopsychosocial–spiritual–cultural
assessment covering a client’s environmental supports and
stressors, medical needs and medications, current use of drugs
and alcohol, and internal and external coping methods and
resources. Assessing lethality is first and foremost.
2. Make psychological contact and rapidly establish the collaborati
relationship.
In a crisis, a social worker must do this quickly, generally as part of
assessment.
3. Identify the major problems, including crisis precipitants.
A social worker should determine from a client why things have
“come to a head.” There is usually a “last straw,” but a social
worker should also find out what other problems a client is
concerned about.
It can also be useful to prioritize the problems in terms of which
problems a client wants to work on first.
4. Encourage an exploration of feelings and emotions.
A social worker should validate a client’s feelings and emotions and
let the client vent about the crisis. The use of active listening skills,
paraphrasing, and probing questions is essential. A social worker
should also challenge maladaptive beliefs.
5. Generate and explore alternatives and new coping strategies.
A social worker and a client must come up with a plan for what will
help improve the current situation. Brainstorming possibilities and
finding out what has been helpful in the past are critical.
6. Restore functioning through implementation of an action plan.
This stage represents a shift from a crisis to a resolution. A client
and a worker will begin to take the steps negotiated in the previous
stage. This is also where a client will begin to make meaning of the
crisis event.
177
Plan follow-up.
7. 107
Follow-up can take many forms as it can involve phone or in-
person visits at specific intervals. A postcrisis evaluation may look
at a client’s current functioning and assess a client’s progress.
THE EFFECT OF POVERTY ON INDIVIDUALS, FAMILIES,
GROUPS, ORGANIZATIONS, AND COMMUNITIES
Clients who are poor often do not have resources to meet their basic
needs. There are many social problems that contribute to and result from
poverty, including, but not limited to, little or no education, poor basic
nutrition and hygiene, disability or illness, unemployment, substance
abuse, and homelessness.
Family income has selective but, in some instances, quite substantial
impacts on child and adolescent well-being. Family income appears to be
more strongly related to children’s ability and achievement than to their
emotional outcomes.
Children who live in extreme poverty or who live below the poverty line
for multiple years appear, all other things being equal, to suffer the worst
outcomes. The timing of poverty also seems to be important for certain
outcomes. Children who experience poverty during their preschool and
early school years have lower rates of school completion than children and
adolescents who experience poverty only in later years. Although more
research is needed, findings to date suggest that interventions during early
childhood may be most important in reducing poverty’s impact on children.
Social workers must also consider the implications on the
biopsychosocial–spiritual–cultural aspects of well-being. Medical care may
be neglected in order to meet other needs. Coping skills are needed when
there are dramatic changes in income and opportunities to adapt and
return to economic stability are critical.
Wealth is often poorly distributed. A small minority has all the money,
causing major societal tensions and divisions. There are the “haves” and
the “have nots.” Communities are often homogeneous—with those
comprised of poor people being segregated from those living above the
poverty line. Communities comprised of the poor have fewer opportunities
and resources to assist their members, leading to a greater likelihood that
they will not be able to break out of the cycle that originally resulted in their
economic insecurity. Thus, those born into poverty often remain there
throughout their life course.
178
THE IMPACT OF THE ENVIRONMENT (E.G., SOCIAL,
PHYSICAL, CULTURAL, POLITICAL, ECONOMIC) ON
INDIVIDUALS, FAMILIES, GROUPS, ORGANIZATIONS, AND
COMMUNITIES
Social workers must be knowledgeable about human behavior across the
life course, the range of social systems in which people live, and the ways
social systems promote or deter people in maintaining or achieving health
and well-being. Social workers should apply theories and knowledge to
understand biological, social, cultural, psychological, and spiritual
development.
The ecological perspective is rooted in systems theory, which views coping
as a transactional process that reflects the “PIE” relationship. Using this
perspective, the focus of intervention is the interface between a client
108
(person, family, group, etc.) and a client’s environment. The ecological
perspective is also concerned with the issues of power and privilege and
how they are withheld from some groups, imposing enormous stress on
affected individuals.
Environmental factors can have strong positive or negative impacts on
development.
SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC JUSTICE
Social work is a profession aimed at helping people address their
problems and match them with the resources they need to lead healthy
and productive lives. One of the most important values of the social work
profession is social and economic justice. Social justice is the view that
everyone deserves equal economic, political, and social rights and
opportunities.
Economic justice is a component of social justice. It is a set of moral
principles for building economic institutions, the ultimate goal is to provide
an opportunity for each person to create a sufficient material foundation
upon which to have a dignified, productive, and creative life.
Social workers promote social-justice and social change with and on
behalf of clients who are individuals, families, groups, organizations,
and/or communities.
Social workers aim to open the doors of access and opportunity for all,
particularly those in greatest need.
179
Social workers also apply social justice principles to structural
problems in the social service agencies in which they work. Armed with the
long-term goal of empowering clients, they use knowledge of existing legal
principles and organizational structure to suggest changes to protect
clients, who are often powerless and underserved.
THEORIES OF SOCIAL CHANGE AND COMMUNITY
DEVELOPMENT
There is no one way to define community development. Over the years,
community development has been defined as an occupation, a movement,
an approach, and a set of values. It has been labeled the responsibility of
social workers because it is seen as the most practical framework for
creating lasting change for clients.
Community development has been used to the benefit of communities
of place, of interest, and of identity. But despite these differences, there
are certain principles, characteristics, and values that underpin nearly
every definition of community development—neighborhood work aimed at
improving the quality of community life through the participation of a broad
spectrum of people at the local level.
Community development is a long-term commitment. It is not a quick
fix to address a community’s problems, nor is it a time-limited process. It
aims to address imbalances in power and bring about change founded on
social justice, equality, and inclusion. Its key purpose is to build
communities based on justice, equality, and mutual respect.
Community development is ultimately about getting community
members working together in collective action to tackle problems that
many individuals may be experiencing or to help in achieving a shared
dream that many individuals will benefit from.
THE IMPACT OF SOCIAL INSTITUTIONS ON SOCIETY
109
Many social institutions exist within our society. They have many functions
including satisfying individuals’ basic needs, defining and promoting
dominant social values, defining and promoting individual roles, creating
permanent patterns of social behavior, and supporting other social
institutions.
The five basic institutions are family, religion, government, education,
and economics.
180
Some of the functions of each of these institutions include the
following.
Family
■ To control and regulate sexual behavior
■ To provide for new members of society (children)
■ To provide for the economic and emotional maintenance of individuals
■ To provide for primary socialization of children
Religion
■ To provide solutions for the unexplained
■ To support the normative structure of the society
■ To provide a psychological diversion from unwanted life situations
■ To sustain the existing class structure
■ To promote and prevent social change
Government
■ To create norms via laws and enforce them
■ To adjudicate conflict via the courts
■ To provide for the welfare of members of society
■ To protect society from external threats
Education
■ To transmit culture
■ To prepare for jobs and roles
■ To evaluate and select competent individuals
■ To transmit functional skills
181
Economics
110
■ To provide methods for the production and distribution of goods a
services
■ To enable individuals to acquire goods and services that are produced
THE IMPACT OF GLOBALIZATION ON CLIENTS/CLIENT
SYSTEMS (E.G., INTERRELATEDNESS OF SYSTEMS,
INTERNATIONAL INTEGRATION, TECHNOLOGY,
ENVIRONMENTAL OR FINANCIAL CRISES, EPIDEMICS)
Globalization has had a profound effect on social work practice, changing
service delivery; creating new social problems for practitioners to address,
such as human trafficking and environmental issues; and producing
demands for indigenization, or the development of locality specific forms of
theory and practice. Globalization refers to an interconnectedness of
persons across the world.
The current globalization of the economy requires that social workers
broaden their horizons and view many domestic social justice issues within
a global framework. Social workers can benefit from knowing how the
issues in their town or nation are played out in other towns and nations.
There is so much to learn of innovative practices and of possible solutions
to social problems that never would have been imagined without an
international exchange of information. Globalization has the potential to
transport traditional social policy analysis into an ever-widening
international arena. Social workers must help people to influence their own
governments to consider human rights issues in foreign relations.
Contained in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights are principles
germane to the alleviation of oppression and injustice. Social workers
recognize the benefits and disadvantages of globalization for the most
vulnerable people in the world, focusing especially on how the economic
and environmental consequences affect social relationships and individual
opportunity.
CRIMINAL JUSTICE SYSTEMS
Social work is an essential component of the criminal justice system. For
the most part, social work practice as performed in the various criminal
182
(and juvenile) justice systems is referred to as criminal justice social work,
correctional social work, or forensic social work.
Criminal justice social workers serve as frontline staff and
administrators in criminal justice settings. There are many thousands of
social workers employed in criminal justice settings, serving criminal
justice populations, or both.
In the United States, the criminal justice system encompasses a broad
spectrum of public and private agencies and settings including, but not
limited to, federal and state correctional facilities; city and county jails;
federal, state, and city parole and probation agencies; federal, state, and
local court systems (including drug courts and mental health courts);
community-based nonprofit agencies; faith-based agencies; and primary
health and behavioral health care providers.
Schools of social work prepare their graduates to address the complex
111
psychosocial needs of individuals in the criminal justice system. Social
work is adapting to the evolving changes in the country’s philosophy on the
best ways to balance the sometimes conflicted dichotomy between the
need for public safety and the need to address the biopsychosocial needs
of offenders. The ethical challenge to social workers is to weigh the needs
of the justice system against those of the offender. The social worker
should take on the challenge by participating in legislative action to mold
social policy to create a balance between the justice system and the
offender. Thus, the social worker can help the justice system provide more
effective services to the offender, their families, and their communities as
professionals by participating in the process of public policy development.
Two competing, dichotomous schools of thought drive the discussion
related to crime prevention. One, the pro-punishment school of thought,
postulates that punishment is the means to preventing; whereas the
positivist (pro-treatment) philosophy suggests that some instances of
criminal behavior are determined by factors, such as mental illness, that
offenders find difficult to control. Therefore, treatment becomes a means of
preventing future criminal behaviors. Social work has historically been
strongly associated with the positivist school of thought of crime
prevention. Social work must recognize its professional obligation both to
the offender and to the community (from a public safety perspective) and
participate in the process of developing crime reduction policies that reflect
social work’s commitment to both the offender and the community.
THE IMPACT OF OUT-OF-HOME PLACEMENT (E.G.,
HOSPITALIZATION, FOSTER CARE, RESIDENTIAL CARE,
183
CRIMINAL JUSTICE SYSTEM) ON CLIENTS/CLIENT SYSTEMS
The use of out-of-home placement is generally viewed as an intervention
that only occurs when there is a health or safety risk in the home. This risk
can be due to the individual who is being removed (caused by a medical or
behavioral health issue of the individual being removed) or family
members (caused by child abuse or neglect, medical or behavioral health
issues of a family member, etc.). Often, out-of-home placement occurs
after in-home interventions have been tried and failed.
Individuals who are placed outside of their homes often experience
significant life problems. Determining whether these issues are directly
caused by the removal is difficult as these individuals are likely to be at-
risk for such problems prior to the placements.
For example, children who are removed from their homes due to abuse
and/or neglect typically use mental health or other social services more
than before they were placed away from their parents. These children
often report a high level of stress, which may manifest in substance abuse,
chronic aggressive or destructive behavior, suicidal ideation or acting out,
and/or patterns of runaway behavior. Academic problems are also
common among these children.
For all those leaving their homes, regardless of age, there is a
disruption of emotional bonds with other family members, which is often
accompanied by rage, grief, sadness, and/or despair.
THEORIES OF COUPLES DEVELOPMENT
112
Although relationships vary significantly, there are some predictable stages
that characterize intimate relationships. Couples interactions follow a
developmental model, much like those that explain individual growth
throughout the life course.
Stage 1: Romance
The first stage of couples development begins when individuals are
introduced and learn that they have common interests and are attracted to
one another. Much of this stage consists of conversations and dates to
learn more about the other partner. The focus of this stage is attachment.
Like early stages of child development, the infancy of couples
development is filled with passion, nurturing, and selfless attention to the
needs of others. Differences are minimized and partners place few
184
demands on each other. This romantic bond is the foundation that is
critical to the health of the relationship in the future.
In this first stage, members engage in symbiotic or mutualistic
relationships—often putting the needs of others before their own.
Individuals who are coupling do not see themselves as unique—much like
babies identifying themselves as part of their mothers or caregivers.
Differentiation and learning to balance and support the separate needs of
others happens in later stages but is not present initially.
Stage 2: Power Struggle
Soon individuals who are engaged in intimate relationships see that they
have differences from their mates. These unique qualities result in unique
needs that require an ongoing process of defining oneself and managing
conflict which threatens intimacy. As the coupled individuals begin to
notice differences and annoyances that were once overlooked, there can
be greater separation and loss of romance resulting from self-expression.
This stage differs as individuals focus on differences rather than
similarities, which was the hallmark of the initial romantic stage.
Time away from each other is often needed for the partners, and the
bliss associated with the initial stage of couples development dissolves.
Differentiation, or seeing oneself as distinct within a relationship, must be
managed so that these new feelings do not result in breakups as the
illusion of “being one” fades. Critical effort must be made to balance the
desire for self-discovery with the desire for intimacy. To “survive” this
stage, individuals must acknowledge differences, learn to share power,
forfeit fantasies of complete harmony, and accept partners without the
need to change them.
Stage 3: Stability
This stage in couples development is characterized by the redirection of
personal attention, time, and activities away from partners and toward
one’s self. Individuals focus on personal needs in a manner that is
respectful of others. Autonomy and individuality are key. Relationships are
seen as more mature as disagreements can occur with both parties
“winning.” There is acceptance that partners are different from one another
and power struggles to minimize these differences are avoided.
Margaret Mahler described “practicing” as a subphase of separation-
individuation in infant development. Practicing occurs when toddlers begin
to explore on their own, but still see themselves as part of their
113
mothers/caregivers. The stability stage of couples development mirrors
185
this subphase as partners learn to live independent lives while still
identifying as and seeing the value of being part of an intimate relationship.
Another subphase of separation-individuation identified by Mahler,
“rapprochement,” also relates to the stability stage of couples
development. Often, partners who have been successful in achieving a
well-defined sense of self in relationships will have crises that will threaten
their identities or separateness. They may rely more heavily on
companionship and intimacy, seeking more comfort and support from each
other. Thus, the stability stage is a time when there is still some back and
forth between intimacy and independence with the ultimate goal being
intimacy that does not sacrifice separateness.
Stage 4: Commitment
While the commitment stage of couples development is when marriage is
ideal, it often occurs earlier in the romance stage, perhaps explaining the
high rates of divorce caused by the inability to resolve power struggles.
Individuals who have stabilized are able to embrace the reality that both
partners are human, resulting in shortcomings in all relationships. Partners
acknowledge that they want to be with each other and that the good
outweighs the bad. Although much work has been done in building
relationships, there is still more needed to effectively function in the next
and last stage of couplehood.
Stage 5: Co-creation
Constancy is the hallmark of this last stage. Just like children who are able
to internalize and maintain images of their mothers/caregivers and use
them to soothe in stressful moments, couples in this stage are able to do
something similar. Each partner is able to value and respect the
separateness of the other. The foundation of the relationship is no longer
personal need, but the appreciation and love of the other and the support
and respect for mutual growth.
Often, couples in this stage work on projects together, such as
businesses, charities, and/or families. This stage aims to make a
contribution beyond the relationship itself. Like Erik Erikson’s stage of
psychosocial functioning in middle adulthood, which focuses on the crisis
of generativity versus stagnation, this stage of couples development aims
to create or nurture things that are enduring, often by creating positive
change that benefits other people. Success leads to feelings of usefulness
and accomplishment.
186
As with Erikson’s and other theories of development, stages are not linear.
Lessons learned help couples move forward, but couples can revert back
to prior stages, especially those including power struggles.
Same gender couples also go through these developmental stages, but
have unique challenges that impact relationship formation. For example,
heterosexual couples have a much wider variety of public role models for
their partnerships than their same gender peers. In addition, there may be
heightened concerns by partners about acceptance of their mates or even
the very existence of their intimate relationships by their respective
families.
THE IMPACT OF PHYSICAL AND MENTAL ILLNESS ON
114
FAMILY DYNAMICS
Physical illness and/or disability places a set of extra demands on the
family system. An illness and/or disability can consume a lot of a family’s
resources of time, energy, and money, so that other individual and family
needs may go unmet.
Day-to-day assistance may lead to exhaustion and fatigue, taxing the
physical and emotional energy of family members. There can be emotional
strain, including worry, guilt, anxiety, anger, and uncertainty about the
cause or prognosis of the disability, about the future, about the needs of
other family members, and about whether the individual is getting enough
assistance.
There can be a financial burden associated with getting health,
education, and social services; buying or renting equipment and devices;
making accommodations to the home; transportation; and acquiring
medications and/or special food. The person or family may be eligible for
payment or reimbursement from an insurance company and/or a publicly
funded program such as Medicaid or Supplemental Security Income.
However, knowing about services and programs and then working to
become eligible is another major challenge faced by families.
Working through eligibility issues and coordinating among different
providers is a challenge faced by families for which they may want a social
worker to assist.
Many communities still lack programs, facilities, and resources that
allow for the full inclusion of persons with disabilities. Families often report
that one burden comes from dealing with people in the community whose
attitudes and behaviors are judgmental, stigmatizing, and rejecting.
187
There are differential impacts on families. The degree to which a
physical illness and/or disability limits activities or functions of daily living
or the ages of individuals or parents when an illness/disability emerges are
important factors that may impact on adjustment.
The impact of mental illness on family dynamics also can be profound.
Mental illness of a family member affects all aspects of family functioning,
including physical, financial, and emotional well-being. These impacts
often depend upon the relationship of family members to a person with a
mental illness. For those closest, there can be considerable time spent
addressing some of the practical impacts of mental illness, such as
financial problems and disruptions to daily life. This time commitment can
result in family members giving up things they care about or missing
appointments needed for their own health or well-being.
When mental illness is first diagnosed, family members may deny that
there is a continuing illness. If there is a crisis, family members may be
upset about what is happening, but the desire to put the incident “behind
them” often emerges once the episode is over. Thus, family members may
believe that the symptomatic behavior of the mental illness will never
return. Some family members often do understand the reality of the illness,
whereas others do not. This can cause problems and tension within the
family, as well as isolation and loss of meaningful relationships with those
who are not supportive of the illness.
Due to the stigma sometimes associated with mental illness, family
members may often be reluctant to discuss it with others because they do
not know how other people will react. Isolation can also occur because
family members may be reluctant to invite anyone to the home for fear of
the presence of unpredictable behavior and/or the fear that the activity
may be a stressor, triggering behavior related to the illness. This isolation
causes families to withdraw from previous relationships to protect both
themselves and their loved ones.
Families may have little knowledge about mental illness. They may
inappropriately believe that it is a condition that is totally disabling. Without
correct information, families may become very pessimistic about the
115
future. They may need assistance from social workers in learning how
to manage the illness and to plan for the future.
It is difficult for anyone to deal with strange thinking and bizarre and
unpredictable behavior. Family members may be bewildered, frightened,
and exhausted. Even when stabilized, those with mental illness may have
apathy and lack of motivation that can be frustrating to family members.
Family members may become angry and frustrated as they struggle to get
188
back to a routine that previously they took for granted. If the illness is not
stable, families go from crisis to crisis, feeling that they have no control
over what is happening. Family life can be unsettled and unpredictable. It
becomes very difficult, often impossible, to plan for family outings or
vacations. The needs of those with mental illness take over the attention of
families and siblings can feel that their needs are put off or ignored.
CO-OCCURRING DISORDERS AND CONDITIONS
Co-occurring disorders and conditions are present when there are two or
more disorders occurring at the same time. For example, clients may have
one or more disorders relating to the use of alcohol and/or other drugs, as
well as one or more mental disorders. In order for a disorder or condition to
be co-occurring, it must be independent and not symptomatology resulting
from the other disorder(s)/condition(s).
Co-occurring disorders used to be called “dual diagnoses” or “dual
disorders.” Just as the field of treatment for substance use and mental
disorders has evolved to become more precise, so too has the terminology
used to describe clients with both substance use and mental disorders.
Many clients with severe mental illness are further impaired by substance
use disorders. However, co-occurring can also be used to describe clients
with other conditions, such as those with physical and/or intellectual
disabilities.
Though co-occurring, disorders and conditions may not be equivalent
in severity, chronicity, and/or degree of impairment in functioning. For
example, disorders or conditions may each be severe or mild, or one may
be more severe than the other. The severity of both disorders or conditions
may also change over time.
Compared with clients who have a single disorder or condition, clients
with co-occurring disorders or conditions often require longer treatment,
have more crises, and progress more gradually in treatment. Integrated
treatment or treatment that considers the presence of all the disorders or
conditions at the same time is associated with lower costs and better
outcomes.
THE IMPACT OF CAREGIVING ON FAMILIES
Although caregiving is at the heart of family functioning, the dynamics of
families can be greatly altered when family members experience physical
189
illness or disability. For example, when a primary family caregiver becomes
ill or disabled, family roles must shift to redistribute the tasks this family
member is unable to perform. This redistribution includes both instrumental
and emotional tasks, as the family may face a loss of both financial and
emotional support that was provided by the primary family caregiver.
When a child is ill or disabled, parents can be overwhelmed by the added
responsibilities to typical childrearing. In addition, healthy siblings may also
feel the strain and may feel that they should not “burden” parents any
116
further, so they ignore their own emotional and/or physical needs.
The stage when physical illness or disability occurs within the life
course can also have differential impacts. For example, parents of children
born ill or disabled may be more accepting of the situation than those who
are faced with the illness or disability of children that occurs later. At any
time, it is a major challenge for a family to tend to its members’ individual
developmental needs and meet the caregiving demands of a serious
illness or disability. Some families may be paralyzed at the time of the
illness or onset of the disability. Crisis intervention may be needed to
stabilize the situation and develop coping skills.
Addressing the grief or loss that can accompany chronic illness or
disability may also be needed. In addition, families may seek help from
social workers to identify critical resources because they are not able to
meet family members’ needs and/or their own without them. Lastly, illness
and disability can be isolating for an individual, as well as the individual’s
family.
PSYCHOLOGICAL DEFENSE MECHANISMS AND THEIR
EFFECTS ON BEHAVIOR AND RELATIONSHIPS
To manage internal conflicts, people use defense mechanisms. Defense
mechanisms are behaviors that protect people from anxiety. Defense
mechanisms are automatic, involuntary, and usually unconscious
psychological activities to exclude unacceptable thoughts, urges, threats,
and impulses from awareness for fear of disapproval, punishment, or other
negative outcomes. Defense mechanisms are sometimes confused with
coping strategies, which are voluntary.
The following are some defense mechanisms (the list of defense
mechanisms is huge, and there is no theoretical consensus on the exact
number).
190
1. Acting Out—emotional conflict is dealt with through actions rath
than feelings (i.e., instead of talking about feeling neglected, a pers
will get into trouble to get attention)
2. Compensation—enables one to make up for real or fancie
deficiencies (i.e., a person who stutters becomes a very expressi
writer; a short man assumes a cocky, overbearing manner)
3. Conversion—repressed urge is expressed as a disturbance of bo
function, usually of the sensory, voluntary nervous system (as pa
deafness, blindness, paralysis, convulsions, tics)
4. Decompensation—deterioration of existing defenses
5. Denial—primitive defense; inability to acknowledge true significan
of thoughts, feelings, wishes, behavior, or external reality factors th
are consciously intolerable
6. Devaluation—a defense mechanism frequently used by persons w
borderline personality disorder in which a person attribut
exaggerated negative qualities to self or another. It is the split
primitive idealization
7.
Dissociation—a process that enables a person to split mental
functions in a manner that allows expression of forbidden or
unconscious impulses without taking responsibility for the action,
either because the person is unable to remember the disowned
behavior, or because it is not experienced (i.e., pathologically
117
expressed as fugue states, amnesia, or dissociative neurosis,
or normally expressed as daydreaming)
8. Displacement—directing an impulse, wish, or feeling toward
person or situation that is not its real object, thus permitting expressi
in a less threatening situation (i.e., a man angry at his boss kicks h
dog)
9. Idealization—overestimation of an admired aspect or attribute
another
10. Identification—universal mechanism whereby individuals patte
themselves after significant others. Plays a major role in personal
development, especially superego development
191
11. Identification With the Aggressor—mastering anxiety
identifying with a powerful aggressor (such as an abusing parent)
counteract feelings of helplessness and to feel powerful onese
Usually involves behaving like the aggressor (i.e., abusing othe
after one has been abused oneself)
12. Incorporation—primitive mechanism in which psych
representation of a person is (or parts of a person are) figurative
ingested
13. Inhibition—loss of motivation to engage in (usually pleasurab
activity avoided because it might stir up conflict over forbidde
impulses (i.e., writing, learning, or work blocks or social shyness)
14. Introjection—loved or hated external objects are symbolica
absorbed within self (converse of projection) (i.e., in seve
depression, unconscious unacceptable hatred is turned toward self)
15. Intellectualization—where the person avoids uncomfortab
emotions by focusing on facts and logic. Emotional aspects a
completely ignored as being irrelevant. Jargon is often used as
device of intellectualization. By using complex terminology, the foc
is placed on the words rather than the emotions
16. Isolation of Affect—unacceptable impulse, idea, or act
separated from its original memory source, thereby removing t
original emotional charge associated with it
17. Projection—primitive defense; attributing one’s disowned attitude
wishes, feelings, and urges to some external object or person
18. Projective Identification—a form of projection utilized
persons with borderline personality disorder—unconscious
perceiving others’ behavior as a reflection of one’s own identity
19. Rationalization—third line of defense; not unconscious. Givi
believable explanation for irrational behavior; motivated
unacceptable unconscious wishes or by defenses used to cope w
such wishes
20. Reaction Formation—person adopts affects, ideas, attitudes,
behaviors that are opposites of those harbored consciously
192
unconsciously (i.e., excessive moral zeal masking strong, b
repressed asocial impulses or being excessively sweet to ma
unconscious anger)
Regression—partial or symbolic
21. 118
return to more infantile patterns of reacting or thinking. Can be in
service to ego (i.e., as dependency during illness)
22. Repression—key mechanism; expressed clinically by amnesia
symptomatic forgetting serving to banish unacceptable idea
fantasies, affects, or impulses from consciousness
23. Splitting—defensive mechanism associated with borderli
personality disorder in which a person perceives self and others
“all good” or “all bad.” Splitting serves to protect the good objects.
person cannot integrate the good and bad in people
24. Sublimation—potentially maladaptive feelings or behaviors a
diverted into socially acceptable, adaptive channels (i.e., a perso
who has angry feelings channels them into athletics)
25. Substitution—unattainable or unacceptable goal, emotion,
object is replaced by one more attainable or acceptable
26. Symbolization—a mental representation stands for some oth
thing, class of things, or attribute. This mechanism underlies drea
formation and some other symptoms (such as conversion reaction
obsessions, compulsions) with a link between the latent meaning
the symptom and the symbol; usually unconscious
27. Turning Against Self—defense to deflect hostile aggression
other unacceptable impulses from another to self
28. Undoing—a person uses words or actions to symbolically reverse
negate unacceptable thoughts, feelings, or actions (i.e., a pers
compulsively washing hands to deal with obsessive thoughts)
ADDICTION THEORIES AND CONCEPTS
There are many risk factors for alcohol and other drug abuse, including,
but not limited to:
193
1. Family: Parents, siblings, and/or spouse use substances; fam
dysfunction (i.e., inconsistent discipline, poor parenting skills, lack
positive family rituals and routine); family trauma (i.e., death, divorce)
2. Social: Peers use drugs and alcohol; social or cultural norms condo
use of substances; expectations about positive effects of drugs a
alcohol; drugs and alcohol are available and accessible
3. Psychiatric: Depression, anxiety, low self-esteem, low tolerance f
stress; other mental health disorders; feelings of desperation; loss
control over one’s life
4. Behavioral: Use of other substances; aggressive behavior in childhoo
impulsivity and risk-taking; rebelliousness; school-based academic
behavioral problems; poor interpersonal relationships
Different models are believed to explain the causes of substance
abuse.
1.
Biopsychosocial model: There are a wide variety of reasons why
people start and continue using substances. This model provides
the most comprehensive explanation for the complex nature of
119
substance abuse disorders. It incorporates hereditary
predisposition, emotional and psychological problems, social
influences, and environmental problems.
2. Medical model: Addiction is considered a chronic, progressiv
relapsing, and potentially fatal medical disease.
■ Genetic causes: Inherited vulnerability to addiction, partic
alcoholism
■ Brain reward mechanisms: Substances act on parts of the brai
reinforce continued use by producing pleasurable feelings
■ Altered brain chemistry: Habitual use of substances alters
chemistry and continued use of substances is required to avoid f
discomfort from a brain imbalance
3. Self-medication model: Substances relieve symptoms of a psychiat
disorder and continued use is reinforced by relief of symptoms.
4. Family and environmental model: Explanation for substance abuse ca
be found in family and environmental factors such as behaviors shape
194
by family and peers, personality factors, physical and sexual abus
disorganized communities, and school factors.
5. Social model: Drug use is learned and reinforced from others w
serve as role models. A potential substance abuser shares the sam
values and activities as those who use substances. There are
controls that prevent use of substances. Social, economic, and politic
factors, such as racism, poverty, sexism, and so on, contribute to t
cause.
Whatever the root causes, a client’s substance abuse problem must be
addressed before other psychotherapeutic issues. A social worker should
also rule out symptoms being related to a substance abuse problem before
attributing them to a psychiatric issue.
Substance Use Disorder
A substance use disorder is characterized by the problematic use of
substances such as alcohol, drugs (both legal and illegal), or other
addictive substances. It is a complex condition that involves a pattern of
behaviors in which individuals continue to use the substance despite
experiencing negative consequences in various areas of their life,
including physical health, mental well-being, social relationships, and work
or school performance.
A substance use disorder is typically categorized into different levels of
severity, ranging from mild to moderate to severe, based on the number of
symptoms and their impact on an individual’s life. Some common
substances associated with substance use disorders include alcohol,
opioids, stimulants, cannabis, and sedatives.
Symptoms of a substance use disorder can include:
1. Loss of control: Individuals find it challenging to limit their use of t
substance, often consuming more than intended or over longer perio
than intended.
2. Craving: There is a strong desire or urge to use the substance.
3. Physical dependence: The body becomes accustomed to t
substance, leading to withdrawal symptoms when its use is reduced
stopped.
195
Tolerance: Over time, more of the
substance is needed to achieve the desired effects.
4. 120
5. Neglect of activities: Important activities such as work, scho
and social interactions are neglected due to substance use.
6. Continued use despite consequences: Despite experienci
negative consequences like health problems, relationship issues, leg
troubles, or financial difficulties, individuals continue to use t
substance.
7. Failed attempts to quit: There are repeated unsuccess
attempts to cut down or control substance use.
8. Time spent obtaining and using the substance: A significa
amount of time is spent obtaining, using, or recovering from the effec
of the substance.
9. Reduced social and recreational activities: Participation
previously enjoyed activities decreases due to substance use.
Treatment for substance use disorders often involves a combination of
medical, psychological, and social interventions. These can include
detoxification, counseling, therapy (such as cognitive-behavioral therapy),
support groups (like Alcoholics Anonymous or Narcotics Anonymous), and
in some cases, medication. The approach to treatment can vary based on
the substance involved, the severity of the disorder, and the individual’s
specific needs.
Non-Substance-Related Disorders
There are also many other addictions that involve the use of something
besides drugs and alcohol. An addiction is any behavior that a client feels
powerless to control and interferes with the client’s normal daily life.
Addictions can have serious physical, emotional, and psychological
consequences.
Sexual addiction is often misunderstood because, although it is
perfectly acceptable to enjoy sexual activity, letting desires dictate daily life
can cause shame and embarrassment. Sexual addiction often involves
compulsive and promiscuous sexual behavior, porn addiction, and/or
excessive masturbation.
196
Though essential for survival, food can also be the focus of addiction.
Consuming excessive amounts of food is used by some to fill voids related
to loneliness, shame, or lack of self-worth. This addiction can result in
obesity or the development of an eating disorder. Some clients who have
eating disorders also get addicted to exercise, such as running, to control
their weight. Computer usage is also related to other addictions, such as
online gambling and shopping.
Essentially, people can become addicted, dependent, or compulsively
obsessed with any activity, substance, object, or behavior that gives
pleasure. These activities, substances, objects, or behaviors produce beta-
endorphins in the brain, producing a “high,” leading to an addictive cycle.
Those who are addicted will become obsessed with an activity, substance,
object, or behavior and will seek it out, often to the detriment of work or
interpersonal relationships. They will compulsively engage in the activity
even if they do not want to do so. Cessation of the activity results in
withdrawal symptoms of irritability, craving, and restlessness. Those with
addictions do not appear to have control as to when, how long, or how
121
much they will continue the activity, use of the substance or object, or
behavior (loss of control). Individuals with addictive behaviors deny
problems resulting from the addiction, even though others can see the
negative effects. They usually have low self-esteem because there are
psychological factors associated with other addictions as well.
Goals of Treatment
1. Abstinence from substances
2. Maximizing life functioning
3. Preventing or reducing the frequency and severity of relapse
The harm reduction model refers to any program, policy, or intervention
that seeks to reduce or minimize the adverse health and social
consequences associated with substance use without requiring a client to
discontinue use. This definition recognizes that many substance users are
unwilling or unable to abstain from use at any given time and that there is
a need to provide them with options that minimize the harm that continued
drug use causes to themselves, to others, and to the community.
Recovery is an ongoing process, and relapse occurs when attitudes,
behaviors, and values revert to what they were during active drug or
alcohol use. Relapse most frequently occurs during early stages of
197
recovery, but it can occur at any time. Prevention of relapse is a critical
part of treatment.
Stages of Treatment
1. Stabilization: Focus is on establishing abstinence, accepting
substance abuse problem, and committing oneself to making changes
2. Rehabilitation/habilitation: Focus is on remaining substance-free
establishing a stable lifestyle, developing coping and living skil
increasing supports, and grieving loss of substance use.
3. Maintenance: Focus is on stabilizing gains made in treatment, relap
prevention, and termination.
A social worker should be aware of the signs and symptoms of addiction,
as well as withdrawal. For example, use of cocaine can be associated with
dilated pupils, hyperactivity, restlessness, perspiration, anxiety, and
impaired judgment.
Delirium tremens (DTs) is a symptom associated with alcohol
withdrawal that includes hallucinations, rapid respiration, temperature
abnormalities, and body tremors.
Wernicke’s encephalopathy and Korsakoff’s syndrome are disorders
associated with chronic abuse of alcohol. They are caused by a thiamine
(vitamin B1) deficiency resulting from the chronic consumption of alcohol.
A person with Korsakoff’s syndrome has memory problems. Treatment is
administration of thiamine.
Treatment Approaches
122
1. Medication-assisted treatment interventions assist with interfering w
the symptoms associated with use. For example, methadone,
synthetic narcotic, can be legally prescribed. A client uses it to det
from opiates or on a daily basis as a substitute for heroin. Antabuse
a medication that produces highly unpleasant side effects (flushin
nausea, vomiting, hypotension, and anxiety) if a client drinks alcohol
is a form of “aversion therapy.” Naltrexone is a drug used to redu
cravings for alcohol; it also blocks the effects of opioids.
2. Psychosocial or psychological interventions modify maladapti
feelings, attitudes, and behaviors through individual, group, marital,
198
family therapy. These therapeutic interventions also examine the rol
that are adopted within families in which substance abuse occurs; f
example, the “family hero,” “scapegoat,” “lost child,” or “mascot”
family member who alleviates pain in the family by joking around).
3. Behavioral therapies ameliorate or extinguish undesirable behavio
and encourage desired ones through behavior modification.
4. Self-help groups (Alcoholics Anonymous, Narcotics Anonymou
provide mutual support and encouragement while becoming abstine
or in remaining abstinent. Twelve-step groups are utilized throughout
phases of treatment. After completing formal treatment, the recoveri
person can continue attendance indefinitely as a means of maintaini
sobriety.
THE EFFECTS OF ADDICTION AND SUBSTANCE ABUSE ON
INDIVIDUALS, FAMILIES, GROUPS, ORGANIZATIONS, AND
COMMUNITIES
There are biopsychosocial–spiritual–cultural impacts of substance abuse
or dependence on clients themselves. Clients who use drugs experience a
wide array of physical effects other than those expected. The excitement
or high that results from the use of cocaine is followed by a “crash”: a
period of anxiety, fatigue, depression, and an acute desire for more
cocaine to alleviate these continued feelings. Marijuana and alcohol
interfere with motor control and are factors in many automobile accidents.
Users of hallucinogenic drugs may experience flashbacks, which are
unwanted recurrences of the drug’s effects weeks or months after use.
Sudden abstinence from certain drugs results in withdrawal symptoms. For
example, heroin withdrawal can cause vomiting, muscle cramps,
convulsions, and delirium. With the continued use of substances that are
physically addictive, tolerance develops; that is, constantly increasing
amounts of the drug are needed to duplicate the initial effect.
Substance abuse or dependence also impacts mental health because
it causes irrational behavior, violence, and lapses in memory. Chronic use
of some substances can cause long-lasting changes in the brain, which
may lead to paranoia, depression, aggression, and hallucinations.
In addition, because the purity and dosage of illegal drugs are
uncontrolled, drug overdose is a constant risk. Many drug users also
199
engage in criminal activity, such as burglary and prostitution, to raise
money to buy drugs.
Substance use can disrupt family life and destroy relationships. A
123
client’s preoccupation with the substance, plus its impacts on mood
and performance, can lead to relationship/marital problems. A client may
spend more time on getting and using substances than attending to
relationships with others. Drug use can also create destructive patterns of
codependency. Codependency occurs when a partner/spouse or members
of the family, out of love or fear of consequences, inadvertently enables a
client to continue using substances by covering up, supplying money, or
denying there is a problem.
In addition, substance abuse or dependence can result in accidental
injury, disability, legal involvement, and/or loss of income or employment,
which negatively impacts on those who are friends or family members of a
client. Neglect of friends and family, as well as anger that can lead to
verbal assaults or physical violence, are also seen as a result of substance
abuse or dependence.
Clients who are using or dependent on substances may also tend to
neglect “old” relationships and find those who also engage in similar
behaviors.
Clients with other addictions feel strong cravings or a dependency on
whatever they are addicted to and feel afraid or powerless to let it go.
Clients may feel ashamed or fear the consequences of their addictions
being discovered. They will sometimes lie to conceal engagement in the
behaviors or the extent of their problems.
Secrecy and deceit cause breakdowns in trust within relationships.
Family members of those who are addicted may question their behavior
and feel confused, scared, and angry at changes that they witness. Family
members are frightened by unpredictable situations encountered due to
those who are addicted experiencing ups and downs. One moment they
are happy and positive, but then they can quickly become anxious,
irritable, or depressed. Individuals may be preoccupied with their
addictions and pay less attention to role responsibilities or the
feelings/needs of others. They also may lose interest in family activities
and appear withdrawn.
Family members of those who are addicted often take on more
responsibility at home to compensate for the unreliability or unpredictability
that accompanies addiction. Family members may feel they have to take
control of everything as a way of compensating for the feelings of
instability or unpredictability. Family members often feel strained as they
200
try to successfully juggle extra responsibilities. Communication in these
situations breaks down and relationships become strained or broken.
Distance in relationships can result in a loss of interest in sex or intimacy.
Family members may be worried that their behavior will exacerbate the
situation or cause clients’ addictions to worsen. Children in families with
addiction also feel the effects because they are aware of arguments and
tension in the home and feel scared and confused. They are also more
likely to develop addictive behaviors as ways of coping.
THE INDICATORS OF ADDICTION AND SUBSTANCE ABUSE
Some people are able to engage in behaviors or use substances without
abusing them and/or becoming addicted.
There are signs when clients are addicted to behaviors and/or
substances are being abused. These include, but are not limited to,
indications that the behavior or substance use is:
■Causing problems at work, home, school, and in relationships
124
■ Resulting in neglected responsibilities at school, work, or home (i.e
flunking classes, skipping work, neglecting children)
■ Dangerous (i.e., driving while on drugs, using dirty needles, havi
unprotected sex, binging/purging despite medical conditions)
■ Causing financial and/or legal trouble (i.e., arrests, stealing to suppo
shopping, gambling, or drug habit)
■ Causing problems in relationships, such as fights with partner or fam
members or loss of old friends
■ Creating tolerance (more of the behavior or substance is needed
produce the same impact)
■ Out of control or causing a feeling of being powerless
■ Life-consuming, resulting in abandoned activities that used to
enjoyed
■ Resulting in psychological issues such as mood swings, attitu
changes, depression, and/or paranoia
Signs of Drug Use
201
■ Marijuana: glassy, red eyes; loud talking, inappropriate laughter follow
by sleepiness; loss of interest, motivation; weight gain or loss
■ Cocaine: dilated pupils; hyperactivity; euphoria; irritability; anxie
excessive talking followed by depression or excessive sleeping at od
times; may go long periods of time without eating or sleeping; weig
loss; dry mouth and nose
■ Heroin: contracted pupils; no response of pupils to light; needle mark
sleeping at unusual times; sweating; vomiting; coughing, snifflin
twitching; loss of appetite
ROLE THEORIES
A role is defined as the collection of expectations that accompany a
particular social position. Clients have multiple roles in their lives; in
different contexts or with different people, such as being students, friends,
employees, spouses, or parents.
Each of these roles carries its own expectations about appropriate
behavior, speech, attire, and so on. What might be rewarded in one role
would be unacceptable for another (e.g., competitive behavior is rewarded
for an athlete but not a preschool teacher). Roles range from specific, in
that they only apply to a certain setting, to diffuse, in that they apply across
a range of situations. For example, gender roles influence behavior across
many different contexts. Role theory examines how these roles influence a
wide array of psychological outcomes, including behavior, attitudes,
cognitions, and social interaction.
There are some important terms used in role theory.
■ Role ambiguity: lack of clarity of role
■
Role complementarity: the role is carried out in an expected
125
way (i.e., parent–child; social worker–client)
■ Role discomplementarity: the role expectations of others differ fro
one’s own
■ Role reversal: when two or more individuals switch roles
■ Role conflict: incompatible or conflicting expectations
When assessing, social workers view problems as differences between
clients’ behaviors and the expectations of others with regard to roles.
202
FEMINIST THEORY
Feminist theory analyzes the status of women and men in society with the
purpose of using that knowledge to better women’s lives. Feminist
theorists question the differences between women and men, including how
race, class, ethnicity, sexuality, nationality, and age intersect with gender.
Themes that are studied include discrimination, objectification (especially
sexual objectification), oppression, stereotyping, and so on. Feminist
theory is used in the fields of social work, sociology, economics, education,
and others.
Feminism is a political, cultural, or economic movement aimed at
establishing equal rights and legal protection for women.
THEORIES OF GROUP DEVELOPMENT AND FUNCTIONING
Humans are small group beings. Group work is a method of social work
that helps individuals to enhance their social functioning through
purposeful group experiences, as well as to cope more effectively with
their personal, group, or community problems. In group work,
individuals help each other in order to influence and change
personal, group, organizational, and community problems.
A social worker focuses on helping each member change the
environment or behavior through interpersonal experience. Members help
each other change or learn social roles in the particular positions held or
desired in the social environment.
A therapeutic group provides a unique microcosm in which members,
through the process of interacting with each other, gain more knowledge
and insight into themselves for the purpose of making changes in their
lives. The goal of the group may be a major or minor change in personality
structure or changing a specific emotional or behavioral problem.
A social worker helps members come to agreement regarding the
purpose, function, and structure of a group. A group is the major helping
agent.
Individual self-actualization occurs through:
■ Release of feelings that block social performance
■ Support from others (not being alone)
■ Orientation to reality and check out own reality with others
203
■ Reappraisal of self
Some types of groups include:
126
■ Groups centered on a shared problem
■ Counseling groups
■ Activity groups
■ Action groups
■ Self-help groups
■ Natural groups
■ Closed versus open groups
■ Structured groups
■ Crisis groups
■ Reference groups (similar values)
Psychodrama is a treatment approach in which roles are enacted in a
group context. Members of the group re-create their problems and devote
themselves to the role dilemmas of each member.
Despite the differences in goals or purposes, all groups have common
characteristics and processes.
The stages of group development are:
1. Preaffiliation—development of trust (known as forming)
2. Power and control—struggles for individual autonomy and gro
identification (known as storming)
3. Intimacy—utilizing self in service of the group (known as norming)
4. Differentiation—acceptance of each other as distinct individuals (know
as performing)
5. Separation/termination—independence (known as adjourning)
Groups help through:
■ Instillation of hope
204
■ Universality
■ Altruism
■ Interpersonal learning
■ Self-understanding and insight
Factors affecting group cohesion include:
■ Group size
■ Homogeneity: similarity of group members
Participation in goal and norm setting for group
■127
■ Interdependence: dependent on one another for achievement
common goals
■ Member stability: frequent change in membership results in le
cohesiveness
There are some advantages to participation in group therapy that
individual treatment does not provide. The group process serves as a
support network and a sounding board for clients. Through the group
process, clients hear specific ideas for improving difficult situations or
circumstances from others who are going through similar challenges.
Group members’ opinions are often highly respected as they come with
the credibility of having experienced similar issues.
Regularly talking and listening to others also helps clients put their own
problems in perspective. Clients may feel that they are the only ones
struggling, but they learn, through the group process, that they are not.
The ability to see and hear others like themselves indicates to clients that
they are not alone and, thereby, reduces stigma and isolation.
Diversity is another important benefit of group therapy. Clients have
different personalities and backgrounds and look at situations in different
ways. By seeing how others address problems, clients are afforded new
strategies for facing their own concerns.
Observing maladaptive behavior in others also may help clients see
the effects of their own similar behavior. Discussing problems in a group
may make it easier for clients to discuss their feelings with others, such as
friends and family members, outside of the group. Group interaction helps
develop healthy social interaction skills. Members can observe the social
205
and coping skills of others who may serve as positive role models. Role
playing is also feasible in the group context.
Key Concepts
Groupthink is when a group makes faulty decisions because of group
pressures. Groups affected by groupthink ignore alternatives and tend to
take irrational actions that dehumanize other groups. A group is especially
vulnerable to groupthink when its members are similar in background,
when the group is insulated from outside opinions, and when there are no
clear rules for decision making.
There are eight causes of groupthink:
1. Illusion of invulnerability—excessive optimism is created th
encourages taking extreme risks
2. Collective rationalization—members discount warnings and do n
reconsider their assumptions
3. Belief in inherent morality—members believe in the rightness of th
cause and ignore the ethical or moral consequences of their decisions
4. Stereotyped views of those “on the out”—negative views of t
“enemy” make conflict seem unnecessary
5. Direct pressure on dissenters—members are under pressure not
express arguments against any of the group’s views
Self-censorship—doubts and
6. 128
deviations from the perceived group
consensus are not expressed
7. Illusion of unanimity—the majority view and judgments are assumed
be unanimous
8. Self-appointed “mindguards”—members protect the group and t
leader from information that is problematic or contradictory to t
group’s cohesiveness, views, and/or decisions
Group polarization occurs during group decision making when
discussion strengthens a dominant point of view and results in a shift to a
more extreme position than any of the members would adopt on their own.
These more extreme decisions are toward greater risk if individuals’ initial
206
tendencies are to be risky and toward greater caution if individuals’ initial
tendencies are to be cautious.
COMMUNICATION THEORIES AND STYLES
Communication theory involves the ways in which information is
transmitted; the effects of information on human systems; how people
receive information from their own feelings, thoughts, memories, physical
sensations, and environments; how they evaluate this information; and
how they subsequently act in response to the information.
Effective communication skills are one of the most crucial components
of a social worker’s job. Every day, social workers must communicate with
clients to gain information, convey critical information, and make important
decisions. Without effective communication skills, a social worker may not
be able to obtain or convey that information, thereby causing detrimental
effects on clients.
One cannot not communicate. Even when one is silent one is
communicating, and another person is reacting to the silence. Silence is
very effective when faced with a client who is experiencing a high degree
of emotion, because the silence indicates acceptance of these feelings. On
the other hand, silence on the part of a client can indicate a reluctance to
discuss a subject. A social worker should probe further with a client who is
silent for an unusually long period of time. If people do not communicate
clearly, mutual understanding, acceptance, or rejection of the
communication will not occur, and relationship problems can arise.
Some communication styles can serve to inhibit effective
communication with clients.
1. Using “shoulds” and “oughts” may be perceived as moralizing
sermonizing by a client and elicit feelings of resentment, guilt,
obligation. In reaction to feeling judged, a client may oppose a soc
worker’s pressure to change.
2. Offering advice or solutions prematurely, before thorough exploration
the problem, may cause resistance because a client is not ready
solve the problem.
3. Using logical arguments, lecturing, or arguing to convince a client
take another viewpoint may result in a power struggle with a client.
better way of helping a client is to assist in exploring options in order
make an informed decision.
207
4. Judging, criticizing, and blaming are detrimental to a client, as well
to the therapeutic relationship. A client could respond by becomi
defensive or, worse yet, internalizing the negative reflections.
Talking to a client in professional
5. 129
jargon and defining a client in terms
of the client’s diagnosis may result in a client internalizing the view
of being “sick.”
6. Providing reassurance prematurely or without a genuine basis is ofte
for a social worker’s benefit rather than a client’s. It is a social worke
responsibility to explore and acknowledge a client’s feelings, no matt
how painful they are. A client may also feel that a social worker do
not understand the client’s situation.
7. Ill-timed or frequent interruptions disrupt the interview process and c
annoy clients. Interruptions should be purposive, well-timed, and do
in such a way that they do not disrupt the flow of communication.
8. It is counterproductive to permit excessive social interactions rath
than therapeutic interactions. In order for a client to benefit from t
helping relationship, the client has to self-disclose about problema
issues.
9. Social workers must provide structure and direction to the therapeu
process on a moment-to-moment basis in order to maximize t
helping process. Passive or inactive social workers may miss fruit
moments that could be used for client benefit. Clients may lo
confidence in social workers who are not actively involved in t
helping process.
The following are some communication concepts that are critical to
social work practice.
Acceptance
An acknowledgment of “what is.” Acceptance does not pass judgment
on a circumstance and allows clients to let go of frustration and
disappointment, stress and anxiety, regret and false hopes. Acceptance
is the practice of recognizing the limits of one’s control. Acceptance is
not giving up or excusing other people’s behavior and allowing it to
continue. Acceptance is not about giving in to circumstances that are
208
unhealthy or uncomfortable. The main thing that gets in the way of
acceptance is wanting to be in control.
Cognitive dissonance
Arises when a person has to choose between two contradictory
attitudes and beliefs. The most dissonance arises when two options are
equally attractive. Three ways to reduce dissonance are to (a) reduce
the importance of conflicting beliefs, (b) acquire new beliefs that change
the balance, or (c) remove the conflicting attitude or behavior. This
theory is relevant when making decisions or solving problems.
Context
The circumstances surrounding human exchanges of information.
Double bind
Offering two contradictory messages and prohibiting the recipient from
noticing the contradiction.
Echolalia
Repeating noises and phrases. It is associated with catatonia, autism
spectrum disorder, schizophrenia, and other disorders.
Information
Anything people perceive from their environments or from within
themselves. People act in response to information.
Information processing
130
Responses to information that are mediated through one’s perception
and evaluation of knowledge received.
Information processing block
Failure to perceive and evaluate potentially useful new information.
Metacommunication
The context within which to interpret the content of the message (i.e.,
nonverbal communication, body language, vocalizations).
Nonverbal communications
Facial expression, body language, and posture can be potent forms of
communication.
In communication, there are two types of content, manifest and latent.
Manifest content is the concrete words or terms contained in a
communication, whereas latent content is that which is not visible, the
underlying meaning of words or terms.
209
Relying just on the manifest content to understand client experiences
or problems may result in not really understanding their meaning to
individuals.
There are social work techniques such as clarifying, paraphrasing,
confronting, and interpreting that can assist social workers in developing a
better understanding of the meaning of clients’ communication.
In addition, therapeutic techniques, such as psychoanalysis, focus on
the hidden meaning of fantasies or dreams.
THEORIES OF CONFLICT
Conflict theory, derived from the works of Karl Marx, posits that society is
fragmented into groups that compete for social and economic resources.
Social order is maintained by consensus among those with the greatest
political, economic, and social resources.
According to conflict theory, inequality exists because those in control
of a disproportionate share of society’s resources actively defend their
advantages. The masses are bound by coercion by those in power. This
perspective emphasizes social control, not consensus and conformity.
Groups and individuals advance their own interests, struggling over control
of societal resources.
There is great attention paid to class, race, and gender in this
perspective since they relate to the most pertinent and enduring struggles
in society.
Conflict theorists challenge the status quo, encourage social change,
and believe rich and powerful people force social order on the poor and
the weak. Conflict theorists note that unequal groups usually have
conflicting values and agendas, causing them to compete against one
another. This constant competition between groups forms the basis for the
ever-changing nature of society.
210
CHAPTER131
3
Diversity and Discrimination
THE EFFECT OF DISABILITY ON BIOPSYCHOSOCIAL
FUNCTIONING THROUGHOUT THE LIFESPAN
With increased age comes increased likelihood of disability as people
live longer and do not encounter fatal diseases. Unfortunately, this
positive association between age and disability sometimes leads to a
negative image of aging. Given that the aging process often results in
some type of disability, examinations of differences in aging outcomes
have not centered around whether disabilities will occur, but rather
when they will happen, how many will occur, and how severe they will
be.
Disability occurs when physical or mental health declines
associated with aging, illness, or injury restrict ability to perform
activities of daily living (ADLs). Mobility impairment is often tied to
disability because being able to ambulate and/or use one’s upper
extremities are critical to engaging in many activities that allow
independence.
The most common causes of disability among older adults are
chronic diseases, injuries, mental impairment, and/or malnutrition.
Major chronic conditions related to disability include cardiovascular
diseases, hypertension, stroke, diabetes, cancer, chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease, musculoskeletal conditions including arthritis and
osteoporosis, mental health conditions such as dementia and
depression, and blindness and visual impairment. Injuries can be due
to accidents and/or falls.
211
There is a relationship between disability and poverty. Poverty can
lead to malnutrition, poor or no health services, and/or unsafe living
conditions that can result in increased risk for disability. Disability can
also result in loss of income and, thus, a greater likelihood of living in
poverty.
Interestingly, happiness and well-being tend to be high among older
adults overall despite declines in physical and mental health and the
onset of disability for some. This discrepancy is due to the fact that not
all disability leads to dependence. If the consequences of disability can
be reduced or eliminated altogether, its negative effects on quality of
life can be minimized.
The environment and improvements in lifestyle are critical. The
environment plays an important role in the impact of disability on the
lives of older adults, with those remaining outside of institutional
settings—such as nursing homes—being more productive and
satisfied. In addition, environments based on accessible design
promote independent living, which can result in good quality of life for
those who are older and/or have disabilities.
Improvements in lifestyle and health behaviors include better
132
nutrition, quitting or reducing smoking, less obesity, and greater
physical activity. Benefits from exercise, even when begun later in life,
can postpone and/or minimize disability.
THE EFFECT OF CULTURE, RACE, AND ETHNICITY ON
BEHAVIORS, ATTITUDES, AND IDENTITY
Cultural, racial, and ethnic groups are diverse and behaviors, attitudes,
and identities of their members change over time. Understanding the
effects cannot be achieved by learning facts about specific populations
or attending trainings on cultural competence. Working with those from
diverse cultural, racial, and/or ethnic groups is a developmental
process that begins with awareness and commitment and evolves into
skill building and culturally responsive behavior.
Social workers must recognize the importance of culture, race,
and/or ethnicity on behaviors, attitudes, and identity. Clients do not
share the same beliefs and practices or perceive, interpret, or
encounter similar experiences in the same way. Social workers must
recognize that people have ethnocentric views that are shaped by their
212
culture, race, and/or ethnicity. It is often difficult to appreciate
differences and to address these differences effectively, because many
people tend to see things solely from their own culture-bound
perspectives.
The following listing describes some effects of culture, race, and/or
ethnicity, as well as factors which can contribute to behavioral,
attitudinal, and identity differences.
Language and Communication
Language is a key element of culture but speaking the same language
does not necessarily mean the sharing of the same cultural beliefs.
Conversely, those who share an ethnicity do not automatically share a
language. Families who immigrated to this country several generations
earlier may identify with their culture of origin but no longer be able to
speak its language.
Styles of communication and nonverbal methods of communication
are also important aspects of cultural groups. Issues such as the use of
direct versus indirect communication, appropriate personal space,
social parameters for and displays of physical contact, use of silence,
preferred ways of moving, meaning of gestures, degree to which
arguments and verbal confrontations are acceptable, degree of
formality expected in communication, and amount of eye contact
expected are all culturally defined and reflect very basic cultural, racial,
and/or ethnic differences. More specifically, the relative importance of
nonverbal messages varies greatly from culture to culture.
Geographic Location
Cultural groups form within communities and among people who
interact meaningfully with each other. Any culture is subject to local
adaptations. For example, clients coming from a geographic area—
even if they come from different ethnicities—can have a great deal in
common, whereas individuals from the same ethnicity who were raised
in different geographic locales can have very different experiences and,
consequently, attitudes.
Geography can strongly affect substance use and abuse, mental
133
health and well-being, and access to and use of behavioral health
213
services. Even among members of the same culture, race, and/or
ethnicity, these factors differ across geographic areas.
Worldview, Values, and Traditions
There are many ways of conceptualizing how culture influences
behaviors, attitudes, and identity. Culture can be seen as a frame
through which to look at the world, beliefs and practices that can be
used to explain why people do what they do, sets of values and
traditions to delineate one group of people from another, and so on.
Cultural groups define the values, worldviews, and traditions of their
members, from food preferences to appropriate leisure activities.
Family and Kinship
Although families are important in all cultural groups, concepts of and
attitudes toward family are culturally defined and can vary in a number
of ways, including the relative importance of particular family ties,
family inclusiveness, hierarchies within families, and how family roles
and behaviors are defined. In some cultural groups, family is limited to
the nuclear family, whereas in other groups, the idea of family typically
includes many other blood or marital relations. Some cultural groups
clearly define roles for different family members and carefully prescribe
methods of behaving toward one another based on specific
relationships. Despite culture, family dynamics may change as the
result of internal or external forces. Acculturation can significantly affect
family roles and dynamics among immigrant families, causing the
dissolution of longstanding cultural hierarchies and traditions, resulting
in potential conflict between spouses or different generations of a
family.
Gender Roles
Gender roles are largely cultural constructs; diverse cultural groups
have different understandings of the proper roles, attitudes, and
behaviors for those of different genders. Culturally defined gender has
a strong effect on behaviors, attitudes, and identity. Some cultural
groups identify gender as binary—male and female—while others do
not.
214
Socioeconomic Status and Education
Socioeconomic status (SES) affects culture in several ways, namely
through the accumulation of material wealth, access to opportunities,
and use of resources. Education is also an important factor related to
SES, with higher levels of education associated with increased income.
Discrimination and historical racism have led to lasting inequalities in
SES. Poverty results in limited access to resources, increased stress,
and enhanced vulnerabilities to substance use and mental illness.
Health disparities are defined as differences in the incidence,
prevalence, morbidity, and burden of diseases and other adverse
health conditions that exist between specific groups. There are
134
longstanding health disparities between cultural, racial and ethnic
groups. The causes of these historical inequalities include lack of
insurance coverage and persistent discrimination, as well as distrust of
the service delivery system by certain groups. Social determinants of
health are conditions that affect functioning and quality-of-life
outcomes, including access to educational, economic, and vocational
training; job opportunities; transportation; healthcare services;
emerging technologies; availability of community-based resources,
basic resources to meet daily living needs, language services, and
social support; exposure to crime; community and concentrated
poverty; and residential segregation.
Immigration and Migration
Immigration is stressful, though the reasons for migrating and the legal
status of immigrants affect the degree of stress. Immigrants who are
refugees from war, famine, oppression, and other dangerous
environments are more vulnerable to psychological distress. They are
likely to have left behind painful and often life-threatening situations in
their countries of origin and are likely to be impacted by these
experiences.
For immigrants, there may be conflicts in identities—wanting to fit in
with new cultures while also wanting to retain the values of their
cultures of origin. Cultural identification may change over time and vary
from group to group. Adaptation and acculturation can be a source of
conflict within families, especially when parents and children adapt or
acculturate at different rates.
215
For documented residents, the process of adaptation tends to be
smoother than for those who are undocumented. However, they can
have concerns surrounding the renewal of visas and obtainment of
citizenship. Undocumented persons may be wary of deportation, are
less likely to seek social services, and frequently encounter hostility.
There are numerous variables that contribute to or influence well-being,
quality of life, cultural adaptation, and the development of resilience.
Immigration nearly always includes separation from family and
culture and can involve a grieving process resulting from these losses,
as well as changes in socioeconomic status, physical environment,
social support, and/or cultural practices. For immigrant families,
disruption of roles and norms often occurs. Clients who are migrants
(e.g., seasonal workers) pose a particular set of challenges as they are
particularly marginalized and underserved due to lack of childcare,
insurance, access to regular health care, and transportation. High rates
of alcohol use, alcohol use disorders, and binge drinking, often occur
as a response to stress or boredom associated with the migrant
lifestyle.
Sexuality
Attitudes toward sexuality and toward sexual identity or orientation are
culturally defined. Each culture determines how to conceptualize
specific sexual behaviors, the degree to which they accept same-
gender relationships, and the types of sexual behaviors considered
acceptable or not. Diverse views and attitudes about appropriate
gender norms and behavior exist between cultural, racial, and/or ethnic
groups. Sexual behaviors considered acceptable for one gender can be
considered unacceptable for another. Other factors that can vary
across cultural groups include the appropriate age for sexual activity,
the rituals and actions surrounding sexual activity, the use of birth
135
control, the level of secrecy or openness related to sexual acts, the
role of sex workers, attitudes toward sexual dysfunction, and the level
of sexual freedom in choosing partners.
Perspectives on Health, Illness, and Healing
Behaviors and attitudes related to health, illness, and healing vary
across racial, ethnic, and cultural groups. In general, cultural groups
216
differ in how they define and determine health and illness; who is able
to diagnose and treat an illness; their beliefs about the causes of
illness; and their remedies, treatments, and healing practices for
illness. In addition, there are complex rules about which members of a
community or family can make decisions about health care across
cultural groups. Mental disorders or symptoms may be socially defined
norms. For instance, in some societies, those who hears voices can be
considered to have greater access to the spirit world and to be blessed
in some way. Furthermore, there are mental disorders that only present
in a specific cultural group or locality. Other specific examples of
cultural differences relate to the use of health care and alternative
approaches to medical diagnoses and treatments.
Religion and Spirituality
Religious traditions or spiritual beliefs are often very important factors
associated with culture, race, and ethnicity. However, members of
religious groups can racially or ethnically diverse. It is important to
distinguish between spirituality and religion. Some clients are willing to
think of themselves as spiritual but not necessarily religious. Religion is
organized, with each religion having its own set of beliefs and practices
designed to organize and further its members’ spirituality. Spirituality,
on the other hand, is typically conceived of as a personal matter
involving a search for meaning; it does not require an affiliation with
any religious group. People can have spiritual experiences or develop
their own spirituality outside of the context of an organized religion.
THE EFFECTS OF DISCRIMINATION AND STEREOTYPES
ON BEHAVIORS, ATTITUDES, AND IDENTITY
The negative impacts of discrimination can be seen on both the micro
and macro levels. Exposure to discrimination is linked to anxiety and
depression as well as other mental health and behavioral problems. In
addition, there may be physical effects such as diabetes, obesity, and
high blood pressure. These health problems may be caused by not
maintaining healthy behaviors (such as physical activity) or engaging in
unhealthy ones (such as smoking and alcohol or drug abuse).
These impacts can be long term or short term, including having:
217
■ Low self-esteem
■ Depression
■ Fear of rejection
■Stress
■ Low self-worth
■ Feelings of being withdrawn from society
■ Humiliation
■ Fear
■ Anger
These impacts can result in long-term effects, including:
■ Loss of motivation
■ Restricted opportunities
■ Limited access to services
■ Long-term depression
■ Increased behavior problems
■ Difficulty communicating
■ Lack of education and achievement
136
Those who have been discriminated against based on culture, race,
and/or ethnicity can become isolated from society and feel
embarrassed about the shame imposed on them and/or their family.
Internalized racism can occur in which negative discriminatory attitudes
based on culture, race, and/or ethnicity can result, with those in
minority groups applying stereotypes toward their own cultural, racial,
and/or ethnic groups.
Those who discriminate against others often do so because they
have been discriminated against themselves. They may be unhappy or
have watched people close to them discriminate against others and/or
are copying and responding to their actions.
218
On a macro level, discrimination also restricts access to the
resources and systems needed for good health, education,
employment, social support, and participation in sports, cultural, and
civic activities. Discrimination and intolerance can also create a climate
of despondence, apprehension, and fear within a community. The
social and economic effects of discrimination on one generation may
flow on to affect future generations, which can lead to cycles of poverty
and disadvantage through those generations.
THE INFLUENCE OF SEXUAL ORIENTATION ON
BEHAVIORS, ATTITUDES, AND IDENTITY
Sexuality is a crucial part of who we are. Sexual orientation, sexual
behavior, and sexual identity are three parts of sexuality that can help
to understand the term better.
Sexual orientation refers to an individual’s pattern of physical
and emotional arousal toward other persons. People do not
choose their sexual orientation—it is simply part of who they are.
Sexual behavior refers to sexual contacts or actions. It is
important to realize that people’s sexual orientation may not fit
perfectly with their sexual behavior (what they do sexually). There
are many factors that shape or determine sexual behavior and
sexual orientation is only one of those factors. Sexual behavior
137
can be influenced by peer pressure, family expectations,
cultural expectations, religious beliefs, and so on.
Sexual identity also may be very different to their sexual
orientation. Sexual identity is about the way people present their
sexual preferences. People may have private sexual identities
which may be different to their public identities. Even private
sexual identities can differ from sexual orientation or attractions.
Many people who experience same-sex attraction and/or have
sexual contact with others of the same sex do not see themselves
as homosexual or bisexual.
Sexual orientation often does not fit “neatly” into a label or category.
People’s attractions can be complicated and often are not clear. Clients
219
may be struggling to determine what feels right for them.
Sexual orientation can be fluid with attractions changing over time.
Some people take a while to figure out these attractions. That does not
mean people “grow out of” their sexual attractions or that one set of
feelings was a stage, it just means people change. It is important to not
use labels and let individuals define their own sexual orientation.
THE IMPACT OF TRANSGENDER AND TRANSITIONING
PROCESS ON BEHAVIORS, ATTITUDES, IDENTITY, AND
RELATIONSHIPS
“Transgender” is a term for people whose gender identity, expression,
or behavior is different from those typically associated with their
assigned sex at birth. “Trans” is sometimes used as shorthand for
“transgender.”
People might realize they are trans (that their gender identity does
not align with their birth sex designation) at any point in their lives.
Some people may first experience an internal sense of identity that
does not match their external characteristics in early childhood. Others
report realizing this in puberty or later. Societal gender norms and
expectations may contribute to realization of their true gender identity.
These assumptions can also contribute to dysphoria, as people might
first attempt to conform to societal expectations by expressing gender
identities they do not have. Feelings of distress frequently arise, during
which people realize that they cannot meet these gender norms as they
do not match their identities.
Transition is a time when individuals begin living as the gender with
which they identify rather than the gender they were assigned at birth,
which often includes changing one’s first name and dressing and
grooming differently. Transitioning may or may not also include medical
and legal aspects, including taking hormones, having surgery, or
changing identity documents (e.g., driver’s license, Social Security
record) to reflect one’s gender identity. Medical and legal steps are
costly and, therefore, unaffordable.
Transition, whether social, through hormone therapy, through
surgery, or through some combination, often improves feelings of
dysphoria, though it may not relieve them completely. The goal of many
is for their gender to be perceived correctly by others, which is often
220
referred to as “passing.” Typically, people transition to align their
physical appearance and characteristics with their gender identities.
Many people begin the process after years of dysphoria and distress,
and transitioning may help them feel as if they are finally able to be
their true selves.
Transitioning can have significant psychological, social, and physical
benefits. Anxiety and depression caused by gender dysphoria may
diminish as dysphoria improves. Individuals who no longer have to
138
make uncomfortable adjustments—such as hiding unwanted
physical characteristics—may not only feel better physically but may
have greater confidence and self-esteem.
People’s reasons for choosing to transition, and the goals they have
regarding transition, are personal and unique. Some individuals may
not pursue certain aspects of transition, whether through personal
choice, lack of resources, or lack of access. There is no single “right”
way to transition. Gender identity does not depend on whether they
have had surgery or if they are taking hormones.
Friends and family members who may have little to no
understanding of gender transition or of what it means to be trans may
ask invasive questions or say things that are invalidating or hurtful,
regardless of intention. They may also find people’s true genders
difficult to accept. “You’ll always be ____ to me,” a mother might say,
without the intention of harm. But this type of remark may be
invalidating and cause distress.
Social work services can help individuals who are transgender as
they consider and move through the transitioning process. They can
also help family members by creating safe spaces where they can ask
questions, develop a better understanding of what it means to be
transgender, and learn more about what transition entails.
SYSTEMIC (INSTITUTIONALIZED) DISCRIMINATION (E.G.,
RACISM, SEXISM, AGEISM)
Social workers should not practice, condone, facilitate, or collaborate
with any form of discrimination on the basis of race, ethnicity, national
origin, color, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity or expression, age,
marital status, political belief, religion, immigration status, or mental or
physical disability (NASW Code of Ethics—Discrimination).
221
Discrimination can occur at the individual or institutional level.
Individual discrimination is when an individual is treated differently
whereas institutionalized discrimination refers to policies or practices
that discriminate against a group of people based on these
characteristics (achievement gaps in education, residential
segregation, etc.).
Social workers are charged with challenging discriminatory
practices and upholding the belief of equal rights for all.
THE PRINCIPLES OF CULTURALLY COMPETENT SOCIAL
WORK PRACTICE
Cultural awareness involves working in conjunction with natural,
informal support and helping networks within a minority community
(neighborhoods, churches, spiritual leaders, healers, etc.). It extends
the concept of self-determination to the community. Only when a
community recognizes and owns a problem does it take responsibility
for creating solutions that fit the context of the culture.
Social workers should promote conditions that encourage respect
for cultural and social diversity and promote policies and practices that
demonstrate respect for difference, support the expansion of cultural
knowledge and resources, advocate for programs and institutions that
demonstrate cultural awareness, and promote policies that safeguard
the rights of all people.
Social workers should act to prevent and eliminate domination of,
139
exploitation of, and discrimination against any person, group, or
class on the basis of race, ethnicity, national origin, color, sex, sexual
orientation, gender identity or expression, age, marital status, political
belief, religion, immigration status, and mental or physical disability.
Since every client’s cultural experiences are different, services must
be delivered using a flexible and individualized approach. Social
workers should be aware of the standards on cultural awareness and
social diversity.
1. Social workers should understand culture and its function in huma
behavior and society, recognizing the strengths that exist in
cultures.
222
2. Social workers should have a knowledge base of their clien
cultures and be able to demonstrate competence in the provision
services that are sensitive to clients’ cultures and to difference
among people and cultural groups. When social workers are fro
different racial or cultural backgrounds than their clients, they mu
clearly understand how these differences impact the problem
solving process.
3. Social workers should obtain education about and seek
understand the nature of social diversity and oppression w
respect to race, ethnicity, national origin, color, sex, sexu
orientation, gender identity or expression, age, marital statu
political belief, religion, immigration status, and mental or physic
disability.
4. Social workers should also not use derogatory language in the
written or verbal communications to or about clients. Social worke
should use accurate and respectful language in all communicatio
to and about clients (NASW Code of Ethics—Derogato
Language).
Social workers should be aware of terminology related to cultural
barriers and goals.
Ethnocentrism: an orientation that holds one’s own culture,
ethnic, or racial group as superior to others
Stratification: structured inequality of entire categories of
people who have unequal access to social rewards (e.g.,
ethnic stratification, social stratification)
Pluralism: a society in which diverse members maintain their
own traditions while cooperatively working together and
seeing others’ traits as valuable (cultural pluralism—
respecting and encouraging cultural difference)
Social workers must possess specific knowledge about the cultural
groups with whom they work, including diverse historical experiences,
adjustment styles, socioeconomic backgrounds, learning styles,
cognitive skills, and/or specific cultural customs. This knowledge must
include theories and principles concerning human behavior
223
development, psychopathology, therapy, rehabilitation, and community
functioning because they relate to cultural group members. Institutions,
class, culture, and language barriers that prevent ethnic group
members from accessing or using services must be identified and
addressed.
Some approaches within organizations to promote cultural diversity
include recruiting multiethnic staff, including cultural awareness
requirements in job descriptions and performance/promotion measures,
reviewing demographic trends for the geographic area served to
140
determine service needs, creating service delivery systems that are
more appropriate to the diversity of the target population, and
advocating for clients as major stakeholders in the development of
service delivery systems to ensure they are reflective of their cultural
heritage.
SEXUAL ORIENTATION CONCEPTS
“Sexual orientation” is a term used to describe patterns of emotional,
romantic, and sexual attraction—and our sense of personal and social
identity based on those attractions. Sexual orientation exists along a
continuum, with exclusive attraction to the opposite sex on one end of
the continuum and exclusive attraction to the same sex on the other.
There are a bunch of identities associated with sexual orientation:
■ People who are attracted to a different gender (e.g., women who a
attracted to men or men who are attracted to women) often c
themselves straight or heterosexual.
■ People who are attracted to people of the same gender often c
themselves gay or homosexual. Gay women may prefer the ter
“lesbian.”
■ People who are attracted to both men and women often c
themselves bisexual.
■ People whose attractions span across many different gend
identities (male, female, transgender, genderqueer, intersex, etc
may call themselves pansexual or queer.
■ People who are unsure about their sexual orientation may c
224
themselves questioning or curious.
■ People who do not experience sexual attraction often c
themselves asexual.
It is also important to note that some people don’t think any of these
labels describe them accurately. Some people don’t like the idea of
labels at all. Other people feel comfortable with certain labels and not
others.
Social workers must let clients identify and use their own labels to
describe their own sexual orientations.
GENDER AND GENDER IDENTITY CONCEPTS
A gender role is a theoretical construct that refers to a set of social and
behavioral norms that, within a specific culture, are widely considered
to be socially appropriate for individuals of a specific sex. Socially
accepted gender roles differ widely between different cultures. Gender
role theory asserts that observed gender differences in behavior and
personality characteristics are, at least in part, socially constructed, and
therefore the product of socialization experiences; this contrasts with
other models of gender, which assert that gender differences are
“essential” to biological sex. Thus, there is a debate over the
environmental or biological causes for the development of gender
roles.
Gender role theory posits that boys and girls learn to perform one’s
biologically assigned gender through particular behaviors and attitudes.
Gender role theory emphasizes the environmental causes of gender
roles and the impact of socialization, or the process of transferring
norms, values, beliefs, and behaviors to group members, in learning
how to behave as a male or a female. Social role theory proposes
141
that the social structure is the underlying force in distinguishing
genders and that sex-differentiated behavior is driven by the division of
labor between two sexes within a society. The division of labor creates
gender roles, which, in turn, lead to gendered social behavior.
Gender has several definitions. It usually refers to a set of
characteristics that are either seen to distinguish between male and
female, one’s biological sex, or one’s gender identity. Gender identity is
225
the gender(s), or lack thereof, a person self-identifies as; it is not based
on biological sex, either real or perceived, nor is it always based on
sexual orientation. There are two main genders, masculine (male) and
feminine (female), although in some cultures there are more genders.
Gender roles refer to the set of attitudes and behaviors socially
expected from those with a particular gender identity.
Gender identity usually conforms to anatomic sex in both
heterosexual and homosexual individuals. However, individuals who
identify as transgender feel themselves to be of a gender different from
their biological sex; their gender identity does not match their anatomic
or chromosomal sex.
Sexual orientation and gender identity are distinct
with those who are transgender exhibiting the same full
range of possible sexual orientations and interests of
those who are not transgender.
It is important to let individuals define their own gender identity. For
some, gender is not just about being male or female; in fact, identity
can change every day or even every few hours. Gender fluidity,
when gender expression shifts between masculine and feminine, can
be displayed in dress, expression, and self-description.
There are lots of misconceptions about gender fluidity. Gender
fluidity is also not the equivalent of transgender, in which a person’s
gender identity is different from the one assigned at birth. It is the belief
that gender exists on a spectrum and is not binary with the ability to
change at any time.
It is important for social workers to use proper “gender pronouns”
when working with clients as it is a sign of mutual respect between the
parties. A “gender pronoun” is the pronoun that a person chooses to
use to be referred to in a sentence or conversation. Some people do
not to use pronouns at all, using their names as pronouns instead. It is
not possible to know people’s gender pronouns by looking at them.
Gender pronouns can also change over time to match shifts in gender
identity.
Being referred to with the wrong pronoun results in feeling
disrespected, invalidated, dismissed, alienated, and/or dysphoric.
Being misgendered can be a source of great distress. It is also
important to use the correct pronouns for the safety of a person. Using
226
incorrect pronouns can “out” someone or expose someone’s identity
without consent.
Asking about and correctly using gender pronouns is one of the
most basic ways to show respect for gender identity. Clients determine
quickly if they feel respected. Social workers must set an example by
asking about and correctly using gender pronouns, educating others
about pronoun privilege. Pronoun privilege occurs when one does not
have to worry about which pronoun is going to be used based on
gender perception.
Gender pronouns can include, but are not limited to:
■ he/him/his (masculine pronouns)
■ she/her/hers (feminine pronouns)
■
they/them/theirs (neutral pronouns)—can be used in the
142
singular and a common gender-neutral pronoun, often used
when unsure what pronoun someone uses
■ ze/zir/zirs (neutral pronouns)
■ ze/hir/hirs (neutral pronouns)
Asking about gender pronouns can occur by using one of the
following questions:
■ “What gender pronouns should I use to refer to you?”
■ “What are your gender pronouns?”
■ “I don’t want to make any assumptions, so what gender pronouns d
you use?”
■ “How should I refer to you in conversations?”
Content Area I: Practice Questions
143
The following section has 41 unique practice questions that assess
retention of material related to human development, diversity, and
behavior in the environment. The number of questions reflects the
227
approximate proportion of a typical exam (24%) devoted to this
content.
1. In which stage of cognitive development do imaginary friends
MOST often emerge?
A. Formal operations
B. Preoperational
C. Sensorimotor
2. According to the family life cycle, which of the following is the
MOST significant role issue in families with young children?
A. Adjusting to children taking a more central role in family
maintenance
B. Adopting and developing parenting roles
C. Assisting children to develop peer relationships
3. A family seeks treatment with a social worker. During the
assessment process, the social worker learns that the parents
expect their children to follow strict rules and the children are
severely punished if they do not. When the social worker asks
the children why they have to follow several of the rules, the
children are not sure why and respond, “just because we do.”
Which of the following parenting styles is MOST likely being
used by the parents in this family?
A. Authoritative
B. Authoritarian
C. Corporal
4
145
.
A social worker is a facilitator of a group for clients diagnosed
as having anorexia nervosa. Over several weeks, clients talk
about their diverse backgrounds, including their varied early
childhood experiences. The social worker comments that this
228
disorder is caused by many different factors. Which of the
following concepts is the social worker mentioning?
A. Homeostasis
B. Equifinality
C. Subsystems
5. Which of the following is accurate about self-image during the
life cycle?
A. Self-esteem generally increases in older adulthood
because individuals have fewer demands placed upon
them in retirement
B. Young children have relatively low self-esteem, but it
gradually increases over childhood
C. Self-esteem declines during adolescence due to body
image concerns, puberty, and academic/social challenges
6. A man is seeing a social worker because he is struggling to
“find himself” as his children have become adults and left the
family home. He feels that his job has become mundane, and
he is feeling “bored with life.” Which stage of psychosocial
development BEST describes the client’s feelings?
A. Generativity versus stagnation
B. Industry versus inferiority
C. Intimacy versus isolation
7. Which of the following BEST describes the typical mental
functioning of older adults?
A. They continue to learn but may experience declines in
memory skills
B. They are at their peak with regard to problem solving and
mental processes
C.
They do not learn and may experience declines in
memory skills
146
229
8
147
.
A client reports to a social worker that she was often criticized
by her parents when she was in elementary and middle school
and now has poor self-esteem and doubts her abilities.
According to Erikson’s stages of psychosocial development, in
which of the following stages is the client experiencing a crisis?
A. Identity versus role confusion
B. Generativity versus stagnation
C. Industry versus inferiority
9. A social worker advises a 16-year-old client who has often
been bullied in public by a group of peers to walk away each
time such an incident occurs in the future. In the past, the boy
would often cry when teased, causing the peers to laugh at his
reaction. Which technique is the social worker recommending
to reduce the teasing?
A. Systematic desensitization
B. Time out
C. Extinction
10. Which of the following perspectives on human behavior is
based on the belief that clients have the capacity to change
themselves and actions are driven by a desire for growth,
personal meaning, and competence?
A. Humanistic
B. Developmental
C. Rational choice
11. Which of the following is a respondent behavior by a client?
A. Crying when feeling sad
B. Becoming an outstanding scholar when not good at sports
C. 148
Walking away from someone when angry
230
149
12.
Which of the following is the MOST appropriate method
for understanding attachment and bonding?
A. Attachment and bonding are best viewed separately from a
client’s culture because the theoretical approaches are
universal
B. Theories of connectedness must be understood within an
evolutionary context
C. Attachment can be viewed as a set of learned behaviors
focused on survival and operant conditioning
13. Which of the following BEST describes entropy?
A. Randomness or disorder in a system, leading to decline
B. Forward motion, leading toward goal achievement
C. Specialization in system function and purpose
14. Which of the following is MOST important when
understanding theories of human development in social work?
A. A strength-based approach
B. An ecological orientation
C. A focus on mental health
15. According to Erikson, which sequence of relationship
formation does psychosocial development follow?
A. Attachment-autonomy-intimacy
B. Intimacy-attachment-autonomy
C. 150
Autonomy-attachment-intimacy
151
16.
Which of the following parenting styles is generally
associated with the MOST negative outcomes in
children?
A. Uninvolved
B. Authoritarian
231
C. Permissive
17. A social worker is referring a client for genetic counseling.
Based on this information, which of following groups is the
client MOST likely a member?
A. Men who are sexually active with a family history of birth
defects
B. Women who are trying to get pregnant but have not been
able to despite fertility treatment
C. Mothers who have suffered postpartum depression
18. A couple comes in to see a social worker because of their
destructive pattern of fighting. The husband complains that his
wife is always nagging him to do things around the house and
suggests that he will get them done if she just stops
complaining. Which of the following behavioral techniques
does the husband state will improve his behavior?
A. Negative punishment
B. Positive punishment
C. Negative reinforcement
19. A client is extremely upset because her 14-year-old son is not
helping around the house, independently doing his homework,
or arriving to school on time. The son states that his mother
watches over him too closely and does not give him needed
privacy. What is MOST likely the root of this problem?
A. Communication
B. Role expectations
C. 152
Developmental functioning
153
20.
Which of the following is a physical symptom associated
with Wernicke’s encephalopathy or Korsakoff’s
syndrome?
A. Memory loss
232
B. Confusion
C. Coordination problems
21. A client has dilated pupils, appears jittery, and complains that
“he just needs to get some sleep.” Which of the following
substances is the client MOST likely using?
A. Cocaine
B. Heroin
C. Marijuana
22. A client shows a social worker a large tattoo on his arm
dedicated to his mother who recently died. He begins to cry
and states that it always makes him very emotional when he
sees it because it reminds him of her bravery in fighting her
illness. Which of the following MOST likely explains why the
client decided to get the tattoo?
A. Symbolization
B. Substitution
C. 154
Sublimation
155
23.
Which of the following is MOST important for a social
worker to consider when treating clients with co-occurring
disorders and conditions?
A. Substance use disorders must be treated prior to mental
health problems
B. Both substance use and mental health disorders may be
mild or severe with the most severe needing immediate
attention
C. Both substance use and mental health disorders must be
treated simultaneously, regardless of severity
24. Which medication is used to treat alcoholism by making
clients feel ill if they consume alcohol while taking this drug?
233
A. Clozaril
B. Antabuse
C. Topamax
25. What is the MOST important for a social worker to focus on
when working with a justice-involved client to reduce
recidivism of criminal activity?
A. Dynamic risk factors
B. Static risk factors
C. 156
Arrest records and past legal involvement
2
157
6
.
A man comes in to see a social worker and tells her that, after
years of substance use, he “has had enough” and gave up
using heroin two days ago. He appears anxious and agitated
and reports vomiting, as well as being unable to sleep. In order
to meet his immediate treatment needs, the social worker
should:
A. Assist him to develop a relapse prevention plan
B. Arrange for him to see a physician to address physical
concerns
C. Complete a biopsychosocial–spiritual–cultural assessment
focusing on the reasons for the substance use
27. Which of the following is an example of a role reversal?
A. A 14-year-old boy told by his mother that he has to work to
financially contribute to household expenses
B. A 13-year-old girl physically and emotionally taking care of
her father who was permanently injured in an accident
C. A 10-year-old boy yelling at his mother that she is not
doing enough work around the house
28. A social worker is working with a family who has become
234
homeless after a fire destroyed their home. The 10-year-old
daughter begins to use “baby talk” and suck her thumb,
behaviors that were not present before the fire. The mother
reports that the daughter now always wants to sit on her lap
and clings to her side when they go out in public. Which of the
following defense mechanisms is MOST likely being used by
the daughter?
A. Undoing
B. Reaction formation
C. Regression
29. Which of the following factors is the MOST important focus of
the person-in-environment classification system?
A. Social role functioning
B. Mental and physical health
C. 158
Psychiatric pathology
159
30.
Which of the following stages of group development are
in sequential order?
A. Preaffiliation, differentiation, intimacy, power and control,
and separation/termination
B. Preaffiliation, power and control, intimacy, differentiation,
and separation/termination
C. Differentiation, preaffiliation, power and control, intimacy,
and separation/termination
31. Which of the following BEST describes delirium tremens?
A. Neurological deterioration that can occur in older adults
B. Physical symptoms associated with alcohol withdrawal
C. Psychotic features linked with certain mental health
diagnoses
32. A client who reports that she repeatedly feels the urge to
235
physically strike her child when angry tells the social worker
that she is having trouble moving her arm. Which of the
following defense mechanisms is the client MOST likely
exhibiting?
A. Introjection
B. Reaction formation
C. Conversion
33. In a dysfunctional family, the role of the “mascot” is to:
A. Complete the responsibilities of others who are not able
B. Help the family’s image with others by doing well
C. Get others to laugh as a way of drawing attention away
from family problems
34. A client tells a social worker that he has been screamed at by
his boss on a daily basis for the last month. He is very angry
but has not said anything for fear of being fired. He also
reports that he is having problems with his wife and children
because he has not been able to control his temper in the last
few weeks at home. Which of the following defense
mechanisms BEST represents the client’s behavior?
A. Displacement
B. Incorporation
C. 160
Compensation
161
35.
Which of the following is MOST important for a social
worker to know about cultural, racial, and ethnic
identities?
A. These identities are passed from one generation to the
next
B. These identities are often stable over the life course
C. These identities are linked to feeling of belonging
236
36. Which of the following is accurate about youth who are
homosexual and/or gender non-conforming?
A. They go through different developmental stages than their
peers
B. They are likely to develop strong identities due to the
availability of many role models
C. They are more at risk for social isolation and poor self-
image than their peers
37. Which of the following BEST describes acculturation?
A. One culture seeking ways to establish its own identity from
others that exist
B. One culture incorporating elements of another culture into
its own ways
C. One culture trying to work with others despite differences
38. A school social worker asks the parents of a boy who is Asian
to come in for a conference because he has been
experiencing problems at school. These problems include not
obeying rules and deliberately annoying others. The
grandparents of the boy come to the meeting with the parents.
Which of the following is MOST likely given the presence of
the grandparents at the meeting?
A. The boy is having problems at home and the grandparents
are needed by the parents to assist with the behaviors
B. The grandparents are an important part of the boy’s
support system and should be incorporated into the
treatment plan
C.
The boy will only listen to the grandparents and they will
be needed in the treatment process in order for him to stop
the behaviors in school
162
163
39.
Which of the following BEST defines the relationship
between race and ethnicity?
237
A. Individuals who are the same race are always part of the
same ethnic group
B. Individuals who are the same race may or may not be part
of the same ethnic group
C. Individuals who are the same race are never part of the
same ethnic group
40. A client reports to a social worker that she is thinking of
ending her marriage and would like to get guidance from her
priest about her desire. In response to the client’s request, the
social worker should FIRST:
A. Determine why the client thinks that speaking to her priest
will be helpful
B. Praise the client as the priest should be involved in
religious/spiritual concerns
C. Identify what support is needed to prepare the client for the
meeting with the priest
41. Which of the following is a true statement about a client who
is transgender?
A. The client is likely to undergo gender affirming surgery in
the future
B. The client is likely to dress in clothing of the opposite
gender assigned at birth
C.
The client is likely to experience stigma, bias, and/or
discrimination due to gender identity
164
238
1. B. Piaget defined four stages of cognitive development. They are
sensorimotor, preoperational, concrete operations, and forma
operations. The preoperational stage begins at about age 2 and
ends at about age 7. It is characterized by magical thinking
Imaginary friends often emerge in this stage, when reality is not firm,
and can last into elementary school.
Question Assesses
Content Area I—Human Development, Diversity, and Behavior in
the Environment; Human Growth and Development
(Competency); Theories of Human Development Throughout the
Lifespan (e.g., Physical, Social, Emotional, Cognitive, and
Behavioral) (KSA)
2. B. Families with young children must realign the family system to
make space for children with adopting and developing parenting
roles usually being the most challenging. Helping children to
develop peer relationships is not a role issue and adjusting to
239
children taking a more central role in family maintenance is usually
associated with later family life when children are adults.
Question Assesses
Content Area I—Human Development, Diversity, and Behavior in
the Environment; Human Growth and Development
(Competency); The Family Life Cycle (KSA)
3. B. In authoritarian parenting, children are expected to follow the
strict rules established by the parents. Failure to follow such rules
usually results in punishment. Authoritarian parents fail to explain
the reasoning behind these rules. Like authoritarian parents, those
with an authoritative parenting style establish rules and guidelines
that their children are expected to follow. However, this parenting
style is much more democratic. Authoritative parents are responsive
to their children and willing to listen to questions. When children fai
to meet the expectations, these parents are more nurturing and
forgiving rather than punishing.
Question Assesses
Content Area I—Human Development, Diversity, and Behavior in
the Environment; Human Growth and Development
(Competency); Parenting Skills and Capacities (KSA)
144
4. B. Equifinality refers to the concept that similar outcomes may stem
from different experiences. Different early experiences in life (i.e.,
parental divorce, physical abuse, and parental substance abuse)
can lead to similar outcomes (i.e., diagnoses). In other words, there
are many different experiences that can lead to the same problems,
behaviors, and/or disorders.
Question Assesses
Content Area I—Human Development, Diversity, and Behavior in
the Environment; Human Growth and Development
(Competency); Systems and Ecological Perspectives and
Theories (KSA)
240
5. C. Self-esteem is relatively high in childhood, drops during
adolescence, rises gradually throughout adulthood, and then
declines sharply in old age. Declines during adolescence are
perhaps due to a decrease in body image and other problems
associated with puberty, as well as the increasing ability to think
abstractly, coupled with more academic and social challenges.
Question Assesses
Content Area I—Human Development, Diversity, and Behavior in
the Environment; Human Growth and Development
(Competency); Factors Influencing Self-Image (e.g., Culture,
Race, Religion/Spirituality, Age, Disability, and Trauma) (KSA)
6. A. During middle adulthood, individuals establish careers, settle
down within relationships, begin families, and develop a sense of
being a part of the bigger picture. They give back to society through
raising children, being productive at work, and becoming involved in
community activities and organizations. By failing to achieve these
objectives, individuals become stagnant and feel unproductive.
Question Assesses
Content Area I—Human Development, Diversity, and Behavior in
the Environment; Human Growth and Development
(Competency); Theories of Human Development Throughout the
Lifespan (e.g., Physical, Social, Emotional, Cognitive, and
Behavioral) (KSA)
7. A. The mental development of older adults (age 65–79) and elders
(age 80 and above) is characterized by being active learners and
thinkers, but with declines in memory. In the oldest years, confusion
may signal illness and/or medication problems. Older adults do
continue to learn but are not at their peak with regard to problem
solving due to some declines associated with age.
Question Assesses
241
Content Area I—Human Development, Diversity, and Behavior in
the Environment; Human Growth and Development
(Competency); The Indicators of Normal and Abnormal Physical,
Cognitive, Emotional, and Sexual Development Throughout the
Lifespan (KSA)
8. C. From age 6 to puberty, children begin to develop a sense of pride
in their accomplishments. If they are encouraged and reinforced for
their initiative, they begin to feel industrious and feel confident in
their ability to achieve goals. If this initiative is not encouraged, it
produces feelings of inferiority.
Question Assesses
Content Area I—Human Development, Diversity, and Behavior in
the Environment; Human Growth and Development
(Competency); Theories of Human Development Throughout the
Lifespan (e.g., Physical, Social, Emotional, Cognitive, and
Behavioral) (KSA)
9. C. Extinction is withholding a reinforcer that normally follows a
behavior. Since the behavior no longer is reinforced, it wil
eventually cease. The boy’s reaction of crying is desired by the
bullies, so removal of this response by walking away will hopefully
reduce the incidents in the future.
Question Assesses
Content Area I—Human Development, Diversity, and Behavior in
the Environment; Human Growth and Development
(Competency); Theories of Human Development Throughout the
Lifespan (e.g., Physical, Social, Emotional, Cognitive, and
Behavioral) (KSA)
10. A. In social work, human behavior of clients is often explained
using systems, conflict, rational choice, social constructionist,
psychodynamic, developmental, social behavioral, and humanistic
perspectives. Rational choice believes clients behave in a manner
242
that tries to maximize rewards and minimize costs. A
developmental perspective sees human development as occurring
in defined, age-related stages, which build upon one another and
are distinct. However, the humanistic perspective is based on
seeing each client as unique and responsible for choices made.
Accordingly, clients have the capacity to change themselves as
human behavior is driven by a desire for growth, persona
meaning, and competence.
Question Assesses
Content Area I—Human Development, Diversity, and Behavior in
the Environment; Human Growth and Development
(Competency); Personality Theories (KSA)
11. A. Respondent behavior is a reflex that is not under a client’s
control. Respondent behavior is not affected by consequences, but
instead only elicited by stimuli. It is not learned and is wel
organized at birth. Walking away and studying hard are voluntary,
not involuntary, actions that are not able to readily be modified,
altered, or controlled.
Question Assesses
Content Area I—Human Development, Diversity, and Behavior in
the Environment; Human Growth and Development
(Competency); Theories of Human Development Throughout the
Lifespan (e.g., Physical, Social, Emotional, Cognitive, and
Behavioral) (KSA)
12. C. Connectedness between human beings can be understood
within an evolutionary context. Children come into the world
biologically preprogrammed to form attachments with others,
because this will help them to survive. In addition, some theories
suggest that attachment is a set of learned behaviors. The correct
answer focuses on both survival and environment (i.e., reinforced
behavior). Cultural influences impact on attachment. Thus
attachment and bonding must be viewed, keeping in mind a
client’s cultural background and traditions.
243
Question Assesses
Content Area I—Human Development, Diversity, and Behavior in
the Environment; Human Growth and Development
(Competency); The Principle of Attachment and Bonding (KSA)
13. A. Entropy is associated with disorder in a system. Higher entropy
means higher disorder and lower availability of the system’s
energy to do useful work. Although the concept of entropy
originated in thermodynamics, it is applicable to communications,
psychology, and sociology. The term is often used in systems
theory.
Question Assesses
Content Area I—Human Development, Diversity, and Behavior in
the Environment; Human Growth and Development
(Competency); Systems and Ecological Perspectives and
Theories (KSA)
14. B. Human development in social work must use a person-in-
environment orientation. While strengths-based approaches are
important, they do not help to understand how humans develop
and grow throughout the life course. Additionally mental health is
not the only factor that contributes to well-being. Social work
focuses on how the environment helps promote or hinder growth
which is known as the ecological perspective.
Question Assesses
Content Area I—Human Development, Diversity, and Behavior in
the Environment; Human Growth and Development
(Competency); Theories of Human Development Throughout the
Lifespan (e.g., Physical, Social, Emotional, Cognitive, and
Behavioral) (KSA)
15. A. Erikson’s first stage, which occurs in the first year of life,
focuses on children learning the ability to trust others. They learn
244
whether their needs can be met by others, and insecurities can
develop if these attachments are not nurturing. Children then go
through three states (autonomy vs. shame/doubt, initiative vs
guilt, and industry vs. inferiority) that all focus on autonomy and
exertion of independence. In adulthood, there is a need to begin to
connect with others as part of intimacy versus isolation.
Question Assesses
Content Area I—Human Development, Diversity, and Behavior in
the Environment; Human Growth and Development
(Competency); Theories of Human Development Throughout the
Lifespan (e.g., Physical, Social, Emotional, Cognitive, and
Behavioral) (KSA)
16. A. Those who have experienced uninvolved parenting styles
usually rank lowest across all life domains. They tend to lack self-
control, have low self-esteem, and are less competent than their
peers.
Question Assesses
Content Area I—Human Development, Diversity, and Behavior in
the Environment; Human Growth and Development
(Competency); Parenting Skills and Capacities (KSA)
17. A. Genetic counseling helps individuals understand the risk for an
inherited disease or abnormal pregnancy outcome, discussing with
men and women their chances of having children who are
affected. When providing such counseling, social workers must
have the experience and knowledge to help families understand
birth defects and how inheritance works. They provide information
that helps families make personal decisions about pregnancy and
genetic testing. Women who have suffered postpartum depression
do not need genetic counseling. Although there is evidence that
depression may be both due to “nature and nurture,” the best
assistance for new mothers with family history of postpartum
depression is to be aware of the signs of depression and get
assistance immediately if they recur. Genetic counseling will not
245
help those who have already experienced such depression. These
mothers will need to have heightened awareness of their
vulnerability if they get pregnant in the future. Also genetic
counseling is not focused on infertility so women trying to get
pregnant would also not be likely to referred for this service.
Question Assesses
Content Area I—Human Development, Diversity, and Behavior in
the Environment; Human Growth and Development
(Competency); Basic Principles of Human Genetics (KSA)
18. C. Negative reinforcement is the removal of an aversive (negative)
stimulus with the goal of increasing the targeted behavior. The
husband says that he will do more around the house (targeted
behavior) if the wife stops (removes) the nagging (negative
stimulus).
Question Assesses
Content Area I—Human Development, Diversity, and Behavior in
the Environment; Human Growth and Development
(Competency); Theories of Human Development Throughout the
Lifespan (e.g., Physical, Social, Emotional, Cognitive, and
Behavioral) (KSA)
19. B. Role discomplementarity occurs when role expectations are not
being met and activities associated with these expectations are not
carried out in an expected manner. The client’s belief about what
her son should be doing is not consistent with his behavior. In
addition, the son is dissatisfied with the fulfillment of the role
expectations that he has for his mother. The issue solely involves
role expectations and not communication or developmenta
problems.
Question Assesses
Content Area I—Human Development, Diversity, and Behavior in
the Environment; Human Behavior in the Social Environment
246
(Competency); Role Theories (KSA)
20. C. Wernicke’s encephalopathy and Korsakoff’s syndrome
(sometimes called “Wet Brain”) are disorders associated with
chronic abuse of alcohol. They are caused by a thiamine (vitamin
B1) deficiency resulting from the chronic consumption of alcohol.
Korsakoff’s syndrome or Korsakoff’s psychosis tends to develop as
Wernicke’s symptoms go away. Wernicke’s encephalopathy
causes brain damage in lower parts of the brain called the
thalamus and hypothalamus. Korsakoff’s psychosis results from
permanent damage to areas of the brain involved with memory
Symptoms of Wernicke’s encephalopathy include confusion and
loss of mental activity that can progress to coma and death, loss of
muscle coordination that can cause leg tremor, and/or vision
changes such as abnormal eye movements. Symptoms of
Korsakoff’s syndrome include inability to form new memories or
even seeing or hearing things that are not really there. All the
response choices are associated with Wernicke’s encephalopathy
and Korsakoff’s syndrome but only coordination problems are
physical symptoms which is the focus of the question.
Question Assesses
Content Area I—Human Development, Diversity, and Behavior in
the Environment; Human Behavior in the Social Environment
(Competency); Addiction Theories and Concepts (KSA)
21. A. Cocaine use is indicated by dilated pupils, hyperactivity
euphoria, anxiety, and/or excessive talking. Heroin use is indicated
by contracted pupils, sleeping at unusual times, sweating,
vomiting, twitching, and/or loss of appetite. Marijuana use is
indicated by glassy, red eyes; inappropriate laughter; and/or loss
of interest/motivation.
Question Assesses
Content Area I—Human Development, Diversity, and Behavior in
the Environment; Human Behavior in the Social Environment
247
(Competency); The Indicators of Addiction and Substance Abuse
(KSA)
22. A. Symbolization occurs when emotional feelings are associated
with an object or, in this instance, the client’s tattoo. The tattoo
represents internal ideas, attitudes, and/or feelings of the client’s
mother. It evokes emotions that were present during her illness
and represents her bravery.
Question Assesses
Content Area I—Human Development, Diversity, and Behavior in
the Environment; Human Behavior in the Social Environment
(Competency); Psychological Defense Mechanisms and Their
Effects on Behavior and Relationships (KSA)
23. C. Co-occurring disorders typically refer to coexisting mental
health and substance use disorders. There are several other terms
that have been used to describe people in this category, including
dually diagnosed. There are no specific combinations of substance
use disorders and mental disorders that are defined uniquely as
co-occurring disorders. Best practice is to address both issues
simultaneously as a client cannot adequately deal with menta
health concerns when using substances and substance use is
often rooted in mental health problems.
Question Assesses
Content Area I—Human Development, Diversity, and Behavior in
the Environment; Human Behavior in the Social Environment
(Competency); Co-occurring Disorders and Conditions (KSA)
24. B. Antabuse produces unpleasant side effects when combined
with alcohol. It is used together with behavior modification,
psychotherapy, and support to assist those who have alcohol use
disorder.
Question Assesses
248
Content Area I—Human Development, Diversity, and Behavior in
the Environment; Human Behavior in the Social Environment
(Competency); Addiction Theories and Concepts (KSA)
25. A. Risk factors can be categorized in a number of ways, but the
most common distinctions in forensic risk assessments are
between static and dynamic factors. Static risk factors are
historical factors that do not frequently fluctuate (i.e., genetic
predisposition). Static risk factors include characteristics such as
number of previous convictions, age, offense type, age at first
conviction, and marital status. Many risk assessment tools are
based entirely, or almost entirely, on static risk factors. A problem
with such assessments is that it is virtually impossible for the
offender to alter a risk assessment for the better. Dynamic risk
factors are those that can be changed by interventions such as
change in living situation, treatment of psychiatric symptoms,
abstaining from drug and alcohol use, or access to weapons. Each
client presents with a unique set of risk factors that require an
individualized plan.
Question Assesses
Content Area I—Human Development, Diversity, and Behavior in
the Environment; Human Behavior in the Social Environment
(Competency); The Characteristic of Perpetrators of Abuse,
Neglect, and Exploitation (KSA)
26. B. According to Maslow’s hierarchy of needs, health and safety
are basic needs that must be addressed initially. Abstinence from
substances, such as heroin, can cause nausea, vomiting
diathermia, agitation, sleeplessness, and/or depression. These
symptoms must be treated first before attempting relapse
prevention or identifying a treatment plan. Completing an
assessment is useful but is not as directly tied to “meeting his
immediate treatment needs” as the question directs. Ensuring that
detoxification occurs safely is critical, especially after long-term
use such as that described.
249
Question Assesses
Content Area I—Human Development, Diversity, and Behavior in
the Environment; Human Behavior in the Social Environment
(Competency); Addiction Theories and Concepts (KSA)
27. B. A role reversal is when two individuals switch roles. The 13-
year-old girl has become the caregiver for her father, who is
dependent due to his permanent injury. This is a role reversal
because a parent would usually be meeting the physical and
emotional needs of a child. The other response choices are all role
issues, but none contain a reversal in a parent–child relationship.
Question Assesses
Content Area I—Human Development, Diversity, and Behavior in
the Environment; Human Behavior in the Social Environment
(Competency); Role Theories (KSA)
28. C. Regression occurs when someone returns to an early state of
being. In this instance, the daughter is using more infantile actions,
such as “baby talk” and sucking her thumb. Because she did not
do them immediately prior to the family’s crisis, she may be
relieving some of the anxiety of the situation through her
dependency, which is further evidenced by clinging and wanting to
be physically close to her mother.
Question Assesses
Content Area I—Human Development, Diversity, and Behavior in
the Environment; Human Behavior in the Social Environment
(Competency); Psychological Defense Mechanisms and Their
Effects on Behavior and Relationships (KSA)
29. A. The person-in-environment (PIE) classification system allows
social workers to classify and code problems in social functioning.
It was developed as an alternative to the Diagnostic and Statistica
Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM) and incorporates a strengths
250
perspective to evaluate a client. The ecological perspective or
examining individuals in their environment is the basis of socia
role functioning, which is the most important focus.
Question Assesses
Content Area I—Human Development, Diversity, and Behavior in
the Environment; Human Behavior in the Social Environment
(Competency); person-in-environment (PIE) Theory (KSA)
30. B. Group development can be characterized by the sequentia
steps of forming (preaffiliation), storming (power and control)
norming (intimacy), performing (differentiation), and adjourning
(separation/termination).
Question Assesses
Content Area I—Human Development, Diversity, and Behavior in
the Environment; Human Behavior in the Social Environment
(Competency); Theories of Group Development and Functioning
(KSA)
31. B. Delirium tremens are caused by alcohol withdrawal. The
prescription of benzodiazepines is the treatment of choice to
minimize their impacts. The main symptoms of delirium tremens
are nightmares, agitation, confusion, disorientation, visual and
auditory hallucinations, fever, sweating, and rapid respiration.
Question Assesses
Content Area I—Human Development, Diversity, and Behavior in
the Environment; Human Behavior in the Social Environment
(Competency); Addiction Theories and Concepts (KSA)
32. C. Conversion is when mental conflict or disturbance is transferred
into a physical symptom to relieve anxiety. The loss of movement
in her arm may have resulted from the desire to strike her child.
Question Assesses
251
Content Area I—Human Development, Diversity, and Behavior in
the Environment; Human Behavior in the Social Environment
(Competency); Psychological Defense Mechanisms and Their
Effects on Behavior and Relationships (KSA)
33. C. The “mascot” tries to get others to laugh as a way of improving
the atmosphere and drawing attention away from the dysfunctiona
household.
Question Assesses
Content Area I—Human Development, Diversity, and Behavior in
the Environment; Human Behavior in the Social Environment
(Competency); Addiction Theories and Concepts (KSA)
34. A. Displacement is directing an impulse, wish, or feeling toward a
less threatening object. The client is getting angry at his family
instead of expressing this emotion with his boss.
Question Assesses
Content Area I—Human Development, Diversity, and Behavior in
the Environment; Human Behavior in the Social Environment
(Competency); Psychological Defense Mechanisms and Their
Effects on Behavior and Relationships (KSA)
35. C. Cultural, racial, and ethnic identities are important, particularly
for those who are members of minority groups. They may instil
feelings of belonging to a particular group or groups and
identification with that group (i.e., shared commitment and values).
Cultural, racial, and ethnic identities may change over time as
individuals interact with those from other groups and are
influenced by popular media, literature, and current events. While
cultural, racial, and ethnic identities are passed from one
generation to the next through customs, traditions, language,
religious practice, and cultural values, this information is not the
most important as it is a static factor that cannot be changed.
Understanding how identities impact self-esteem and belonging
252
has the most substantial impact on a client’s current situation and
must be considered in the assessment process.
Question Assesses
Content Area I—Human Development, Diversity, and Behavior in
the Environment; Diversity and Discrimination (Competency); The
Effect of Culture, Race, and Ethnicity on Behaviors, Attitudes, and
Identity (KSA)
36. C. Youth who are homosexual and/or gender nonconforming face
the same developmental tasks as their peers. However, they also
face additional challenges that are different from their peers, such
as the need to develop an identity with few role models. They may
have poor self-image; experience harassment, family rejection,
stigma, or social isolation; or engage in self-harm or risky behavior.
They are often taunted and bullied, resulting in greater risk for
mental and physical health complications compared with their
peers.
Question Assesses
Content Area I—Human Development, Diversity, and Behavior in
the Environment; Diversity and Discrimination (Competency); The
Effect of Discrimination and Stereotypes on Behaviors, Attitudes,
and Identity (KSA)
37. B. Acculturation is a process in which members of one cultura
group adopt the beliefs and behaviors of another. Although
acculturation is usually in the direction of a minority group adopting
habits and language patterns of the majority, acculturation can be
reciprocal with the majority also adopting patterns typical of the
minority group.
Question Assesses
Content Area I—Human Development, Diversity, and Behavior in
the Environment; Diversity and Discrimination (Competency); The
Principles of Culturally Competent Social Work Practice (KSA)
253
38. B. In the Asian culture, there is usually respect for elders and a
hierarchical family structure with strictly prescribed roles and rules
of behavior. The family and extended kinship network is often
involved in treatment. The grandparents are traditionally viewed as
the most knowledgeable and their opinions are held in high
esteem.
Question Assesses
Content Area I—Human Development, Diversity, and Behavior in
the Environment; Diversity and Discrimination (Competency); The
Effect of Culture, Race, and Ethnicity on Behaviors, Attitudes, and
Identity (KSA)
39. B. Ethnicity refers to the idea that one is a member of a particular
cultural group that may share some of the following elements
religion, language, customs, and/or beliefs. Two people can share
the same race, but have different ethnicities. Their customs and
beliefs, as well as traditions, may be very different. However,
individuals in a racial group may also be in the same cultura
group.
Question Assesses
Content Area I—Human Development, Diversity, and Behavior in
the Environment; Diversity and Discrimination (Competency); The
Principles of Culturally Competent Social Work Practice (KSA)
40. C. Cultural awareness involves working in conjunction with
natural, informal support, as well as helping networks (i.e.,
neighborhoods, churches, spiritual leaders, and healers). The
social worker should help prepare the client for the meeting and
provide other support as needed. The social worker should not be
evaluating the client’s reasons for seeking guidance from her
priest or praising her as the priest may not be involved in al
spiritual/religious concerns.
Question Assesses
254
Content Area I—Human Development, Diversity, and Behavior in
the Environment; Diversity and Discrimination (Competency); The
Effect of Culture, Race, and Ethnicity on Behaviors, Attitudes, and
Identity (KSA)
41. C. Most individuals who are transgender do not undergo gender
affirming surgery. Clothing is linked to gender expression so does
not necessarily change due to shifts in identity. Those who are
transgender often experience stigma, bias, or discrimination due to
myths and misconceptions.
Question Assesses
Content Area I—Human Development, Diversity, and Behavior in
the Environment; Diversity and Discrimination (Competency); The
Impact of Transgender and Transitioning Process on Behaviors,
Attitudes, Identity, and Relationships (KSA)
166
165
255
167
Content Area II: Assessment,
Diagnosis, and Treatment
Planning (30%)168
256
CHAPTER169
4
Biopsychosocial History and
Collateral Data
THE COMPONENTS OF A BIOPSYCHOSOCIAL
ASSESSMENT
Social workers use an ecological perspective. They understand that,
regardless of origin, all problems are systemic and are maintained by an
imbalance within and between systems. All client problems are
examined through a biopsychosocial–spiritual–cultural lens to
understand the interplay between and among these elements.
The biological dimension refers to the role of biological systems
within the body (i.e., genetic predispositions) and outside (i.e., airborne
pathogens that impact functioning).
The psychological dimension refers to the role of thoughts, emotion,
and behavior on individual, group, or community functioning. Inclusion of
this dimension also acknowledges the mind–body connection in the
assessment of problems.
The social dimension refers to how a client relates to various groups
and institutions in society, as well as how groups and institutions relate
to the client. Social workers assist not only individual clients, but all
others who might be similarly affected by an issue.
The spiritual dimension refers to the role of religious or spiritual belief
on well-being, whereas the cultural dimension acknowledges the
importance of considering traditions, customs, rituals, values, and
communications that may be part of a client’s cultural heritage.
Systems theory indicates that biopsychosocial–spiritual–cultural
dimensions of a client are interrelated and work together. Thus, when
257
one dimension changes within a system, the whole system or a client’s
well-being is affected.
The biopsychosocial–spiritual–cultural history is a tool that provides
information on the current/presenting issue or issues; a client’s past and
present physical health, including developmental milestones; a client’s
emotional functioning; educational or vocational background; cultural
issues; spiritual and religious beliefs; environmental issues; and social
functioning. Each issue may be reviewed for its relationship and/or
impact with the presenting issue.
The biological section assesses a client’s medical history,
developmental history, current medications, substance abuse history,
and family history of medical illnesses. Issues related to medical
problems should be explored because mental health symptoms can
exacerbate them. Referrals should be made to address medical
concerns that are not being treated. Clients who are on medications
should have care coordinated with the treating provider, and more
should be known about the medications because side effects can also
mask or exacerbate psychiatric symptoms or illnesses.
The psychological section assesses a client’s present psychiatric
170
illness or symptoms, history of the current psychiatric illness or
symptoms, past or current psychosocial stressors, and mental status.
Exploration of how the problem has been treated in the past, past or
present psychiatric medications, and the family history of psychiatric and
substance-related issues is also included.
The social section focuses on client systems and unique client
context, and may identify strengths and/or resources available for
treatment planning. Included are sexual identity issues or concerns,
personal history, familyof origin history, support system, abuse history,
education, legal history, marital/relationship status and concerns, work
history, and risks.
The assessment should also include information about a client’s
spiritual beliefs, as well as the client’s cultural traditions.
TECHNIQUES AND INSTRUMENTS USED TO ASSESS
CLIENTS/CLIENT SYSTEMS
There are many psychological tests in existence for assessment and
diagnostic purposes. The following are a few of the most well known.
258
Beck Depression Inventory
The Beck Depression Inventory (BDI) is a 21-item test, presented in
multiple- choice formats, that assesses the presence and degree of
depression in adolescents and adults.
The Minnesota Multiphasic Personality Inventory
The Minnesota Multiphasic Personality Inventory (MMPI) is an objective
verbal inventory designed as a personality test for the assessment of
psychopathology consisting of 550 statements, 16 of which are
repeated.
Myers–Briggs Type Indicator
The Myers–Briggs Type Indicator (MBTI) is a forced-choice, self-report
inventory that attempts to classify individuals along four theoretically
independent dimensions. The first dimension is a general attitude toward
the world, either extraverted (E) or introverted (I). The second
dimension, perception, is divided between sensation (S) and intuition
(N). The third dimension is that of processing. Once information is
received, it is processed in either a thinking (T) or feeling (F) style. The
final dimension is judging (J) versus perceiving (P).
Rorschach Inkblot Test
Client responses to inkblots are used to assess perceptual reactions and
other psychological functioning. It is one of the most widely used
projective tests.
Stanford–Binet Intelligence Scale
171
The Stanford–Binet Intelligence Scale is designed for the testing of
cognitive abilities. It provides verbal, performance, and full scale scores
for children and adults.
Thematic Apperception Test
The Thematic Apperception Test (TAT) is another widely used projective
test. It consists of a series of pictures of ambiguous scenes. Clients are
asked to make up stories or fantasies concerning what is happening,
has happened, and is going to happen in the scenes, along with a
259
description of their thoughts and feelings. The TAT provides information
on a client’s perceptions and imagination for use in the understanding of
a client’s current needs, motives, emotions, and conflicts, both
conscious and unconscious. Its use in clinical assessment is generally
part of a larger battery of tests and interview data.
Wechsler Intelligence Scale
The Wechsler Intelligence Scale (WISC) is designed as a measure of a
child’s intellectual and cognitive ability. It has four index scales and a full
scale score.
THE TYPES OF INFORMATION AVAILABLE FROM OTHER
SOURCES (E.G., AGENCY, EMPLOYMENT, MEDICAL,
PSYCHOLOGICAL, LEGAL, OR SCHOOL RECORDS)
Assessment is ongoing within the problem-solving process. In order to
ensure that all relevant information is considered, social workers often
rely on information available from clients’ existing records in addition to
the data that they collect directly.
In order to access this information, it is critical that social workers are
aware of laws governing the release of such information and get the
informed consent of clients prior to requesting these documents. The
consent process must make clients aware of the reasons for such
requests and the benefits and risks of social workers obtaining this
information.
When information is obtained, it becomes part of the client record.
Though protected by the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability
Act (HIPAA), these client records can be subject to subpoenas and/or
court orders. Thus, inclusion of this information in their records can have
some additional risks associated with the legal duty to release them if
court ordered to do so.
Despite this risk, using existing employment, medical, psychological,
psychiatric, and educational records can be very helpful when
completing a biopsychosocial–spiritual–cultural history.
Employment records may help social workers construct clients’ work
histories and obtain data about income earned from their jobs. These
records may be essential if clients need assistance with applying for
Unemployment Insurance or other public benefits (Temporary
260
Assistance for Needy Families [TANF], Supplemental Nutrition
Assistance Program [SNAP], and so on).
Medical records are essential to ensure that client problems are not
172
a result of health issues and to better understand the impact of past
or current medical problems on client functioning.
Psychological records can be helpful as they can contain the results
of any psychological testing that has been completed and whether any
mental health diagnoses have been assigned. Whether or not a client
has been prescribed psychotropic medications and/or received any
subsequent treatment for behavioral health concerns would also be
contained in psychiatric records.
When working with children, educational records are often consulted
to determine performance in school and whether any problems
experienced at home or elsewhere are being manifested in this setting
as well. When working with adults, educational records can provide
clues as to the age at which problems or difficulties began. Historical
educational records are often used to diagnose adults with intellectual or
developmental disabilities if they were not appropriately identified while
in school.
Children with disabilities are eligible for free, appropriate public
education between the ages of 3 and 21. Children with disabilities may
have Individual Educational Plans (IEPs) which are revised annually.
Teams composed of social workers, teachers, administrators, and other
relevant school personnel typically create IEPs. Parents, and often the
children, also participate. IEPs include goals, means of attaining goals,
and ways of evaluating goal attainment. Children with IEPs must be
educated in the “least restrictive environment.” Thus, these children
should either spend part or all their time in regular classrooms or in
environments that are as close to this as possible while still leading to
the attainment of educational goals. Services needed, such as speech
therapy and others related to educational goals, are provided at no extra
cost to families.
Components of a Sexual History
Some clients may not be comfortable talking about their sexual history,
sex partners, or sexual practices. It is critical that social workers try to
put clients at ease and let them know that taking a sexual history may be
an important part of the assessment process. A history is usually
261
obtained through a face-to-face interview, but can also be gotten from a
pencil-and-paper document.
Questions included in a sexual history may vary depending upon
client issues. However, they usually involve collecting information about
partners (number, gender, risk factors, length of relationships), practices
(risk behaviors, oral/vaginal/anal intercourse, satisfaction with practices,
desire/arousal/orgasm), protection from and past history of sexually
transmitted diseases (STDs); condom use), and prevention of pregnancy
(if desired)/reproductive history.
If clients are experiencing dissatisfaction or dysfunction, social
workers will need to understand the reasons for dissatisfaction and/or
dysfunction. Medical explanations must be ruled out before
psychological factors are considered as causes. A systems perspective
should be used to understand issues in this area. For example, a
medical/biological condition that decreases satisfaction or causes
dysfunction may heavily impact on psychological and social functioning.
In addition, a psychological or social issue can lead to a lack of desire,
inability to become aroused, or failure to attain orgasm.
Alcohol and/or drug use should also be considered related to
concerns about desire, arousal, or orgasm because they can cause
decreased interest or abilities in these areas.
Components of a Family History
173
Understanding a client’s family history is an important part of the
assessment process. A client is part of a larger family system. Thus,
gaining a better understanding of the experiences of other family
members may prove useful in understanding influences imposed on a
client throughout the life course.
One tool used by social workers to depict a client as part of a larger
family system is a genogram. A genogram is a graphic representation
of a family tree that displays the interaction of generations within a
family. It goes beyond a traditional family tree by allowing the user to
analyze family, emotional, and social relationships within a group. It is
used to identify repetitive patterns of behavior and to recognize
hereditary tendencies. A social worker can also ask about these
relationships, behaviors, and tendencies without using a genogram.
There are no set questions that must be included in a family history;
often, they relate to the problem or issue experienced by a client at the
262
time. However, they may include identifying family members’:
■ Ethnic backgrounds (including immigration) and traditions
■ Biological ties (adoption, blended family structures, foster children)
■ Occupations and educational levels
■ Unusual life events or achievements
■ Psychological and social histories, as well as current well-being
■ Past and present substance use behaviors
■ Relationships with other family members
■ Roles within the immediate and larger family unit
■ Losses such as those from death, divorce, or physical separation
■ Current and past significant problems, including those due to medic
financial, and other issues
■ Values related to economic status, educational attainment, an
employment
■ Coping skills or defense mechanisms
Finding out which adults and/or children get the most attention or
recognition and which get the least may also provide insight.
METHODS TO OBTAIN SENSITIVE INFORMATION (E.G.,
SUBSTANCE ABUSE, SEXUAL ABUSE)
Clients are often reluctant to reveal sensitive information about
themselves and others in their families. However, this information may
be vital to understanding client problems and designing interventions
that will be effective. While there is no set road map of how to elicit this
information, there are some techniques that may assist.
■
A social worker should start off with some open-ended and
nonthreatening questions to gather needed background and get a
client used to talking about the situation before having to
174
disclose more sensitive material. This initial questioning will
263
also give a client time to “test the waters” with a social worker and
gauge the social worker’s reaction as more sensitive information is
provided. Trust is often needed in a therapeutic relationship before
a client can be completely honest about the situation.
■ A social worker should be aware of verbal and nonverbal clues whe
speaking with a client. A client may avoid eye contact, fail
completely answer a question, look down when speaking, or laug
nervously when feeling anxious about a topic. A social worker ma
want to repeat a question or probe further into this area to see if the
is something undisclosed which is causing this behavior.
■ A client who is engaged in couples, family or group treatment m
worry about the confidentiality of revealing sensitive information,
well as the reactions of others to such disclosure. In these instance
a social worker may want to explore with a client whether individu
treatment in lieu of or in conjunction with couples, family, or grou
treatment may be appropriate.
■ A social worker may want to review with a client the profession
mandate for confidentiality and what information will be stored in
client file.
■ A client may be reluctant to reveal sensitive information if the clie
thinks there could be negative repercussions as a result of th
information being disclosed to others verbally or lack of secur
related to the file.
■ A client is much more likely to disclose sensitive information if a soc
worker reacts to such disclosures with acceptance and a neut
stance, being neither judgmental nor confrontational and n
interrupting when information is being gathered.
THE PRINCIPLES OF ACTIVE LISTENING AND
OBSERVATION
Active listening skills are an essential part of building relationships and
trust. The active part in the listening process can be achieved by
showing interest in clients’ words. Once clients notice that social workers
are understanding what is said and really taking an interest,
communication will be more open.
264
Active listening establishes trust and respect, so clients will feel
comfortable confiding in social workers. Thus, it helps build a therapeutic
alliance.
Active listening can also include speaking by using mirroring
techniques to paraphrase and reflect back to clients what they have just
said. For example, a client may say, “I hate my job and my boss yells at
me all the time.” An active listening response might involve saying
something such as, “So you feel like your boss doesn’t appreciate you or
treat you with respect.” Responses need to be tailored to what clients
are saying to demonstrate listening and engagement in what is being
said.
Although most information that a social worker uses during
assessment comes from the social work interview, direct observation of
interactions between family members and the client’s nonverbal
behavior can produce a lot of information about emotional states and
interaction patterns.
Social workers also may use observation as part of macrolevel
175
intervention in order to assess the extent of a problem/issue, driving
and restraining forces for change, key policy influencers, and community
members who can work as part of a task group for reform.
When functioning as an observer, a social worker can take many
roles, including complete participant (living the experience as a
participant), participant as observer (interacting with those who are
participating), observer as participant (limited relationship with others
participating—primarily observer), or complete observer (removed from
activity—observer only). Observation is also a method used in scientific
inquiry to collect data.
THE INDICATORS OF SEXUAL DYSFUNCTION
Sexual dysfunction is a problem associated with sexual desire or
response. Many issues can be included under the term “sexual
dysfunction.” For example, for men, sexual dysfunction may include
erectile dysfunction and premature or delayed ejaculation. For women,
sexual dysfunction may refer to pain during sexual intercourse.
Problems may be caused by psychological factors, physical
conditions, or a combination of both. It is essential that a medical
examination be the first step in treating sexual dysfunction in order to
identify medications or medical conditions that are the causes of the
265
problems. Many of the symptoms can be addressed medically. However,
sexual dysfunction can also be due to childhood sexual abuse,
depression, anxiety, stressful life events, and/or other psychological
issues. Treatment may also be needed to assist with coping with the
signs and symptoms; these include, but are not limited to:
■ Premature or delayed ejaculation in men
■ Erectile disorder (not being able to get or keep an erection)
■ Pain during sex
■ Lack or loss of sexual desire
■ Difficulty having an orgasm
■ Vaginal dryness
SYMPTOMS OF NEUROLOGIC AND ORGANIC DISORDERS
Neurologic and organic symptoms are those that are caused by
disorders that affect part or all of the nervous system or are biologically
based. These symptoms can vary greatly. For example, the nervous
system controls many different body functions. Symptoms can, but do
not have to, be associated with pain, including headache and back pain.
Neurologic symptoms can also include muscle weakness or lack of
coordination, abnormal sensations in the skin, and disturbances of
vision, taste, smell, and hearing.
They may be minor (such as a foot that has fallen asleep) or life
threatening (such as coma due to stroke).
Some Common Neurologic Symptoms
176
Pain
■ Back pain
■ Neck pain
■ Headache
■ Pain along a nerve pathway (as sciatica)
266
Muscle malfunction
■ Weakness
■ Tremor (rhythmic shaking of a body part)
■ Paralysis
■ Involuntary (unintended) movements (such as tics)
■ Clumsiness or poor coordination
■ Muscle spasms
Changes in the senses
■ Disturbances of smell and taste
■ Partial or complete loss of vision
■ Double vision
■ Deafness
■ Ringing or other sounds originating in the ears (tinnitus)
Other symptoms
■ Vertigo
■ Loss of balance
■ Slurred speech (dysarthria)
Changes in consciousness
■ Fainting
■ Confusion or delirium
■ Seizures (ranging from brief lapses in consciousness to seve
muscle contractions and jerking throughout the body)
Changes in cognition (mental ability)
267
■ Difficulty understanding language or using language to speak or wr
(aphasia)
■ Poor memory
■Inability to recognize familiar objects (agnosia) or familiar faces
(prosopagnosia)
■ Inability to do simple arithmetic (acalculia)
177
Other symptoms
■ Vertigo
■ Loss of balance
■ Slurred speech (dysarthria)
Organic brain syndrome is a term used to describe physical
disorders that impair mental function. The most common symptoms are
confusion; impairment of memory, judgment, and intellectual function;
and agitation. Disorders that cause injury or damage to the brain and
contribute to organic brain syndrome include, but are not limited to,
alcoholism, Alzheimer’s disease, fetal alcohol spectrum disorders
(FASDs), Parkinson’s disease, and stroke.
Elderly clients are at high risk for depression, as well as cognitive
disorders, the latter of which can be chronic (as in dementia) or acute
(as in delirium). Some patients have both affective (mood) and cognitive
disorders. Clarifying the diagnosis is the first step to effective treatment,
but this can be particularly difficult because elderly clients often have
medical comorbidities that can contribute to cognitive and affective
changes.
178
268
269
CHAPTER179
5
Assessment and Diagnosis
THE FACTORS AND PROCESSES USED IN PROBLEM
FORMULATION
In micro and macro practice, social workers must work with clients to
identify the problem(s) to be addressed. Problem identification concerns
determining the problem targeted for intervention. Although this seems
straightforward, it is often difficult to isolate the issue that, when
addressed, will result in a change in the symptomology of a client and/or
client system.
Part of problem identification is determining the issue in exact
definable terms, when it occurs, and its magnitude. When doing macro
practice, a social worker may often need to get consensus from the group
regarding whether there is agreement as to the nature of the problem and
its occurrence and magnitude.
It is often useful in problem identification to determine that which is
not the problem. Such a technique will ensure that these elements are not
grouped in with those that are targeted and will assist in narrowing down
the focus.
The problem should always be considered within the person-in-
environment perspective and using a strengths-based approach. It should
not blame a client and/or client system for its existence.
METHODS OF INVOLVING CLIENTS/CLIENT SYSTEMS IN
PROBLEM IDENTIFICATION (E.G., GATHERING
COLLATERAL INFORMATION)
270
Social workers focus on assisting clients to identify problems and areas of
strength, as well as increasing problem-solving strategies.
It is essential that, throughout the problem-solving process, social
workers view clients as experts in their lives.
Clients should be asked about what they would like to see changed in
their lives and clients’ definitions of problems should be accepted.
Clients should be asked about what will be different in their lives when
their problems are solved. Social workers should listen carefully for, and
work hard to respect, the directions in which clients want to go with their
lives (their goals) and the words they use to express these directions.
Clients should be asked about the paths that they would like to take to
180
make desired changes. Clients’ perceptions should be respected and
clients’ inner resources (strengths) should be maximized as part of
treatment.
Use of Collateral Sources
Social workers often use collateral sources—family, friends, other
agencies, physicians, and so on—as informants when collecting
information to effectively treat clients. These sources can provide vital
information because other professionals or agencies may have treated
clients in the past. Family members and friends may also provide
important information about the length or severity of issues or problems.
Collateral information is often used when the credibility and validity of
information obtained from a client or others is questionable. For example,
child custody cases are inherently characterized by biased data within an
adversarial process. Thus, it is often necessary to evaluate the integrity of
information gathered through use of collateral information.
However, social workers should always assess the credibility of
collateral informants, because data from more neutral parties has higher
integrity. In addition, informants who have greater access to key
information may produce more valid data.
When an account by a collateral informant agrees with information
gathered from a client, it enhances the trustworthiness of the data
collected.
Using multiple information sources (or triangulation) is an excellent
method for social workers to have accurate accounts upon which to make
assessments or base interventions.
It is essential that a social worker get a client’s informed consent prior
to reaching out to collateral sources. However, they can be a valuable
271
source of data to supplement that obtained directly from a client, as well
as provide contextual or background information that a client may not
know.
THE COMPONENTS AND FUNCTION OF THE MENTAL
STATUS EXAMINATION
A mental status examination is a structured way of observing and
describing a client’s current state of mind under the domains of
appearance, attitude, behavior, mood and affect, speech, thought
process, thought content, perception, cognition, insight, and judgment. A
mental status examination is a necessary part of any client assessment
no matter what the presenting problem. It should be documented in the
record either in list form or in narrative form. The following client functions
should be included:
1. Appearance—facial expression, grooming, dress, gait, and so on
2. Orientation—awareness of time and place, events, and so on
3. Speech pattern—slurred, pressured, slow, flat tone, calm, and so on
4. Affect/mood—mood as evidenced in both behavior and clien
statements (sad, jittery, manic, placid, etc.)
5. Impulsive/potential for harm—impulse control with special attention
potential suicidality and/or harm to others
Judgment/insight—ability to predict
6. 181
the consequences of her or his
behavior, to make “sensible” decisions, to recognize her or his
contribution to her or his problem
7. Thought processes/reality testing—thinking style and ability to kno
reality, including the difference between stimuli that are coming fro
inside oneself and those that are coming from outside ones
(statements about delusions, hallucinations, and conclusions abo
whether or not a client is psychotic would appear here)
8. Intellectual functioning/memory—level of intelligence and of rece
and remote memory functions
A paragraph about mental status in the record might read as follows:
272
“Client is a 43-year-old woman who looks older than her stated
age. She is well groomed and appropriately dressed for a
professional interview. She is well oriented. Her speech is slow
as if it is painful to talk. She has had occasional thoughts of
‘ending it all,’ but has not made any suicidal plans or
preparations. She talks about future events with expectation to
be alive. She is aware that she is ‘depressed’ and recognizes
that the source of some of the feeling comes from ‘inside
moods’ although she often refers to the difficulties of her
situation. Her thoughts are organized. She is not psychotic.”
METHODS TO INCORPORATE THE RESULTS OF
PSYCHOLOGICAL AND EDUCATIONAL TESTS INTO
ASSESSMENT
Social workers use both tests and assessments to help formulate
diagnoses and to guide treatment for their clients.
Psychological tests are instruments used to measure an
assortment of mental abilities and characteristics, such as
personality, achievement, intelligence, and neurological functioning.
They often take the form of questionnaires. They may be written,
verbal, or pictorial tests (like the famous Rorschach test that uses
inkblot images). The tests may also be referred to as scales,
surveys, screens, checklists, assessments, measures, inventories,
and so on.
Educational tests measure cognitive (thinking) abilities and
academic achievement. These measurements provide a profile of
strengths and weaknesses that accurately identify areas for
academic remediation and insight into the best learning strategies.
They provide details into the learning process that will provide
clients, family members, and school staff the best learning
strategies. Educational assessments provide the necessary
documentation for the legal purposes of establishing the presence of
disabilities, but they do not guarantee that their findings will be
accepted by schools and/or accommodations provided. Reaching
decisions to have educational testing is often arrived at after a period
273
of struggle, distress, and different efforts at improving the
educational process with limited success.
Social work assessment is a more comprehensive process
that may utilize the results from educational and psychological tests,
but can also involve interviewing a client and/or family, reviewing a
client’s history, checking existing records, and consulting with
previous or concurrent providers.
Some common tests are:
182
■ Achievement/Aptitude tests: typically used in education, measu
how much clients know (have achieved) in a certain subject
subjects, or have ability (aptitude) to learn
■ Intelligence tests: measure intelligence (IQ)
■ Job/Occupational tests: match interests with careers
■ Personality tests: measure basic personality traits/characteristics
■ Neuropsychological tests: assess and measure cognitive functioni
(e.g., how a particular problem with the brain affects reca
concentration, and so on)
■ Specialized clinical tests: investigates areas of clinical interest, su
as anxiety, depression, posttraumatic stress disorder, and so on
THE INDICATORS OF PSYCHOSOCIAL STRESS
Psychosocial stress results when there is a perceived threat (real or
imagined). Examples of psychosocial stress include threats to social
status, social esteem, respect, and/or acceptance within a group; threats
to self-worth; or threats that are perceived as uncontrollable.
Psychosocial stress can be caused by upsetting events, such as
natural disasters, sudden health problems or death, and/or breakups or
divorce.
Although current upsetting events certainly create stress, events from
the past can also still affect clients. Social workers should assess the
274
impacts of events such as childhood abuse, bullying, discrimination,
violence, and/or trauma.
Often, psychosocial stress is not caused by single events, but by
ongoing problems such as caring for a parent or child with disabilities.
Stress may manifest itself in many different ways, such as high blood
pressure, sweating, rapid heart rate, dizziness, and/or feelings of
irritability or sadness.
When psychosocial stress triggers a stress response, the body
releases a group of stress hormones that lead to a burst of energy, as
well as other changes in the body. The changes brought about by stress
hormones can be helpful in the short term, but can be damaging in the
long run.
It is essential that clients learn to manage psychosocial stress so that
the stress response is only triggered when necessary and not for
prolonged states of chronic stress.
THE INDICATORS, DYNAMICS, AND IMPACT OF
EXPLOITATION ACROSS THE LIFESPAN (E.G., FINANCIAL,
IMMIGRATION STATUS, SEXUAL TRAFFICKING)
Exploitation is treating someone badly in order to benefit from the
person’s resources or work. It is when someone uses a situation to gain
unfair advantage. Exploitation is more common when there is a power
differential between parties due to social status, abilities, income,
education, job position, and so on.
Social workers have ethical mandates not to exploit clients,
supervisees, students, and others who they come in contact with in their
work.
They also may be asked to assess exploitation of clients by others
183
and intervene when needed. For example, a form of maltreatment
sometimes seen with older adults is financial/material exploitation or
unauthorized use of an older person’s resources. Individuals may
befriend an older person to gain trust so that the older adult’s money or
items of value can be inappropriately used for the individual’s wants or
needs and not the care of the older adult.
On a macro level, it is also important to see the relationship between
discrimination and exploitation of individuals. When individuals are not
provided the same access to social rewards, they are inherently
275
exploited. Most social problems are aggravated by the status of particular
groups in the society, including that:
■ There is a greater prevalence of poverty among people of color an
female household heads.
■ Poverty decreases the opportunities for employment, educatio
goods, and so on.
■ Poverty creates greater stresses that lead to physical and men
illnesses, family breakdown, inability to work, and other problems.
■ Discrimination creates deficits in social power.
THE INDICATORS OF TRAUMATIC STRESS AND VIOLENCE
Stress is a typical response to feeling overwhelmed or threatened. Fight,
flight, and freeze are survival responses to protect individuals from
danger. Individuals react and respond to stress in different ways. There
are many disadvantages to a stressful lifestyle that creates constant
feelings of being overwhelmed, as well as physiological stimulation.
Interventions aimed at social and lifestyle changes can usually restore
physiological and psychological balance in order to address stress.
This is not the case when traumatization occurs. Traumatization is
when a client experiences neurological distress that does not go away or
when the client is not able to return to a state of equilibrium.
Traumatization can lead to mental, social, emotional, and physical
disability. Like stress, trauma is also experienced differently by different
individuals.
There are many indicators of traumatic stress and violence, including:
1. Addictive behaviors related to drugs, alcohol, sex, shopping, a
gambling
2. An inability to tolerate conflicts with others or intense feelings
3. A belief of being bad, worthless, without value or importance
4. Dichotomous “all or nothing” thinking
5. Chronic and repeated suicidal thoughts/feelings
6. Poor attachment
276
7. Dissociation
8. Eating disorders—anorexia, bulimia, and overeating
Self-blame
9. 184
10. Intense anxiety and repeated panic attacks
11. Depression
12. Self-harm, self-mutilation, self-injury, or self-destruction
13. Unexplained, but intense, fears of people, places, or things
When trauma or violence occurs during childhood, children may have
problems regulating their behaviors and emotions. They may be clingy
and fearful of new situations, easily frightened, difficult to console,
aggressive, impulsive, sleepless, delayed in developmental milestones,
and/or regressing in functioning and behavior.
In order to practice competently in this area, social workers must:
1. Realize the widespread impact of trauma and understand potent
paths for recovery
2. Recognize the signs and symptoms of trauma in clients, families, sta
and other systems
3. Respond by fully integrating knowledge about trauma into social wo
policies, procedures, and practices
4. Seek to actively resist retraumatization
METHODS USED TO ASSESS TRAUMA
Trauma is the response that a client has to an extremely negative event.
Although trauma is a normal reaction to a horrible event, the effects can
be so severe that they interfere with a client’s ability to live life. Thus, a
social worker is needed to treat the stress and dysfunction caused by the
traumatic event and to restore a client to a previous emotional state.
Emotional reactions are the common effects of trauma. Impacts of
trauma on clients’ self-image include, but are not limited to:
■ Anxiety
277
■ Denial
■ Agitation
■ Irritability or rage
■ Flashbacks or intrusive memories
■ Feeling disconnected from the world
■ Unrest in certain situations
■ Being “shut down”
■ Being very passive
■ Feeling depressed
■ Guilt/shame/self-blame
■ Unusual fears
■ Impatience
■ Having a hard time concentrating
■Wanting to hurt oneself
■ Being unable to trust anyone
■ Feeling unlikable
■ Feeling unsafe
185
Trauma often manifests physically, including both physiological and
behavioral symptoms. Behavioral manifestations of trauma include, but
are not limited to:
■ Insomnia or fatigue
■ Using harmful substances
■ Keeping to oneself
■ Overworking
■ Lethargy
■ Eating problems
278
■ Drug or alcohol use
■ Needing to do certain things over and over
■ Always having to have things a certain way
■ Doing strange or risky things
Clients may have anxiety or panic attacks and be unable to cope in
certain circumstances. Social workers must often work with clients to
address the underlying emotional impacts of the trauma in order for
clients to make behavioral changes.
Clients who experience trauma often believe that they cannot trust,
the world is not safe, and they are powerless to change their
circumstances. Beliefs about themselves, others, and the world diminish
their sense of competency. Thus, clients view themselves as powerless
or “damaged” and have trouble feeling hopeful.
Clients who have experienced trauma may display intense emotions
toward others, such as friends or family members. Clients can also
emotionally retreat from these individuals, choosing to isolate themselves.
Thus, trauma can be difficult for those who are close to clients as well.
RISK ASSESSMENT METHODS
Social workers are often called upon to assess risks of clients to
themselves and others. Such assessments are not easy, because there
are no indicators that definitively predict whether a client will act on
feelings or desires to do self-harm. A social worker must review all
assessment data in order to determine the appropriate level of care and a
treatment plan. Such an assessment must include examining risk and
protective factors, as well as the presence of behavioral warning signs.
Such an assessment may include examining:
■ Frequency, intensity, and duration of suicidal or violent thoughts
■ Access to or availability of method(s)
■ Ability or inability to control suicidal/violent thoughts
■Ability not to act on thoughts
■ Factors making a client feel better or worse
186
279
■ Consequences of actions
■ Deterrents to acting on thoughts
■ Whether client has been using drugs or alcohol to cope
■ Measures a client requires to maintain safety
In situations where a client is seen to be a danger to self or others, a
social worker may limit a client’s right to self-determination and seek
involuntary treatment such as commitment to an inpatient setting. If a
client is deemed to be a danger to others, a social worker should consider
this as a “duty to warn” situation (under the Tarasoff decision), and notify
the authorities as well as the party in danger.
THE INDICATORS AND RISK FACTORS OF THE
CLIENT’S/CLIENT SYSTEM’S DANGER TO SELF AND
OTHERS
There are risk factors that must be considered in any assessment,
because they are linked to a risk of suicide or violence.
Danger to Self: Suicide
Risk Factors
■ History of previous suicide attempt (best predictor of future attem
medical seriousness of attempt is also significant)
■ Lives alone; lack of social supports
■ Presence of psychiatric disorder—depression (feeling hopeless
anxiety disorder, personality disorder (A client is also at greater ri
after being discharged from the hospital or after being started o
antidepressants as the client may now have the energy to implement
suicide plan.)
■ Substance abuse
■ Family history of suicide
■ Exposure to suicidal behavior of others through media or peers
280
■ Losses—relationship, job, financial, social
■ Presence of firearm or easy access to other lethal methods
Some Protective Factors
■ Effective and appropriate clinical care for mental, physical, an
substance use disorders
■ Easy access to a variety of clinical interventions and support (i.e
medical and mental health care)
■Restricted access to highly lethal methods
187
■ Family and community support
■ Learned coping and stress reduction skills
■ Cultural and religious beliefs that discourage suicide and support se
preservation
Some Behavioral Warning Signs
■ Change in eating and sleeping habits
■ Drug and alcohol use
■ Unusual neglect of personal appearance
■ Marked personality change
■ Loss of interest in pleasurable activities
■ Not tolerating praise or rewards
■ Giving away belongings
■ Isolation from others
■ Taking care of legal and other issues
■ Dramatic increase in mood (might indicate a client has made
decision to end life)
■ Verbalizes threats to commit suicide or feelings of despair an
hopelessness
281
■ “I’m going to kill myself.”
■ “I wish I were dead.”
■ “My family would be better off without me.”
■ “The only way out for me is to die.”
■ “It’s just too much for me to put up with.”
■ “Nobody needs me anymore.”
Danger to Others: Violence
Risk Factors
■ Youth who become violent before age 13 generally commit mo
crimes, and more serious crimes, for a longer time; these youth exhi
a pattern of escalating violence throughout childhood, sometim
continuing into adulthood.
■ Most highly aggressive children or children with behavioral disorde
do not become serious violent offenders.
■ Serious violence is associated with drugs, guns, and other ris
behaviors.
■ Involvement with delinquent peers and gang membership are two
the most powerful predictors of violence.
Some Protective Factors
188
■ Effective programs combine components that address both individu
risks and environmental conditions; building individual skills a
competencies; changes in peer groups
■ Interventions that target change in social context appear to be mo
effective, on average, than those that attempt to change individu
attitudes, skills, and risk behaviors
■ Effective and appropriate clinical care for mental, physical, an
substance abuse disorders
■ Easy access to a variety of clinical interventions and support (i.e
282
medical and mental health care)
■ Restricted access to highly lethal methods
■ Family and community support
■ Learned coping and stress reduction skills
Some Behavioral Warning Signs
■ Drug and alcohol use
■ Marked personality changes
■ Angry outbursts
■ Preoccupation with killing, war, violence, weapons, and so on
■ Isolation from others
■ Obtaining guns or other lethal methods
METHODS TO ASSESS THE CLIENT’S/CLIENT SYSTEM’S
STRENGTHS, RESOURCES, AND CHALLENGES (E.G.,
INDIVIDUAL, FAMILY, GROUP, ORGANIZATION,
COMMUNITY)
Clients typically seek social work services for help with problems or
difficulties. As a result, the assessment generally focuses on the
problems. This focus can lead to an overemphasis on client pathology
and dysfunction without the same attention to client strengths,
capabilities, and achievements. Information on both strengths and
challenges are needed to get a full understanding of the client situation.
Social workers must be sensitive to client strengths and skillful in
using them to achieve service goals. Social workers who do not attend to
client strengths will not be able to determine clients’ potential for growth
and the steps needed to get there. Often clients are experiencing self-
doubt or poor self-esteem. To assist with helping clients view themselves
more positively, social workers must be able to emphasize their strengths.
Strengths which may be overlooked include clients:
■ Facing problems by seeking help—rather than denying them
■ Taking risks by sharing problems with social workers
283
■Persevering under difficult situations
■ Being resourceful
■ Meeting family and financial obligations
■ Seeking to understand the actions of others
■ Functioning in stressful situations
■ Considering alternative courses of action
189
Methods to identify more about client strengths, resources, and
challenges can be obtained by:
■ Seeking exceptions—determining when the problem does not exist o
occur (locations, times, and contexts)
■ Scaling the problem—identifying the severity of the problem on a scal
from 1 to 10 according to the client
■ Scaling motivation—estimating the degree to which client feels hopefu
about resolution
■ Miracle question—having the client determine what would be differen
if problem did not exist
When conducting community assessments, it is essential for social
workers to identify strengths and challenges. Strengths are positive
features of the community that can be leveraged to develop solutions to
problems. Strengths can include organizations, people, partnerships,
facilities, funding, policies, regulations, and culture.
A social worker should consider the current assets that are already in
existence to promote the quality of life of community members. For
example, organizations that provide after-school programs that help youth
graduate on time would be included in a community assessment focused
on keeping kids in school. In some instances, a social worker may want
to look at experiences of other communities with similar demographics
that have successfully addressed similar problems. Examining the
presence and utilization of strengths in these communities can assist a
social worker in determining if similar assets can be found in its target
community.
A social worker must also develop an informed understanding of the
gaps or needs that exist within a community. These needs serve as
284
challenges that can affect a large or small number of community
members. If community needs affect a large number of community
members, there may be more support for addressing them. Collaboration
and community building are essential in addressing community
challenges.
There are a number of methods for data collection related to
community strengths and challenges including interviews, observation,
and surveys. Ensuring that the data collection procedures are robust is
essential in conducting a complete and accurate community assessment.
THE INDICATORS OF MOTIVATION, RESISTANCE, AND
READINESS TO CHANGE
Social workers should not assume that clients are ready or have the skills
needed to make changes in their lives. Clients may be oppositional,
reactionary, noncompliant, and/or unmotivated. These attitudes or
behaviors are often referred to as resistance.
There are indicators that a social worker should use as evidence that
190
a client may be resistant or not ready/able to fully participate in
services. These indicators include as follows:
■ Limiting the amount of information communicated to a social worker
■ Silence/minimal talking during sessions
■ Engaging in small talk with a social worker about irrelevant topics
■ Engaging in intellectual talk by using technical terms/abstract concept
or asking questions of a social worker that are not related to clien
issues or problems
■ Being preoccupied with past events, instead of current issues
■ Discounting, censoring, or editing thoughts when asked about them b
a social worker
■ False promising
■ Flattering a social worker in an attempt to “soften” the social worker so
the client will not be pushed to act
■ Not keeping appointments
■ Payment delays or refusals
285
It is essential to determine the extent to which this resistance or these
inabilities are caused by a client, a social worker, and/or the conditions
present.
A client may be resistant due to feelings of guilt or shame and may
not be ready to recognize or address the feelings and behaviors being
brought up by a social worker. Clients may be frightened of change and
may be getting some benefit from the problems that they are
experiencing.
Social workers may experience a lack of readiness, as they have not
developed sufficient rapport with clients. There also may not be clear
expectations by clients of their role versus those of social workers. Social
workers need to use interventions that are appropriate for clients.
Sometimes, a lack of readiness or ability is a result of external factors,
such as changes in clients’ living situations, physical health problems,
lack of social support, and/or financial problems.
Whatever the causes, a social worker must address these barriers as
clients will not make changes until they are ready and able.
Behavior change is best understood as a process with different
stages of readiness. For most clients, behavior change occurs gradually
over time, with a client progressing from being uninterested, unaware, or
unwilling to make a change (precontemplation), to considering a change
(contemplation), to deciding and preparing to make a change
(preparation). This is followed by definitive action, as well as attempts to
maintain the new behavior over time (maintenance). Clients can progress
in both directions in the stages of change.
Often a client comes to a social worker in the precontemplation stage,
in which the client is not even considering changing or is in denial about
the need to change. Contemplation is the first time that there is some
movement toward change because a client, while ambivalent about
changing, may weigh the benefits versus costs (i.e., time, expense, effort)
of change. In preparation, a client may indicate a willingness to
experiment with small changes, whereas the action stage is characterized
by definitive change behaviors.
The goal is to move a client along the continuum toward making a
positive change. Patience is needed as it is unrealistic to expect that
change will occur with a single intervention.
Techniques that a social worker can use to determine a client’s
191
readiness to change include asking the client:
■ What would your life be like … (describe behavior needing change)?
286
■ Is that a life that you would like?
■ What would be a good result of changing?
■ How will you know when it is time to think about changing?
■ What signals will tell you to think about making a change?
■ How ready are you on a scale from 1 to 10 to make a change?
■ What are the good things about the way you are currently trying t
change?
■ What are the things that are not so good?
■ What are the barriers to changing?
■ What are some things that could help you overcome this barrier?
Participating in the problem-solving process and showing up for
appointments on time are good indicators that a client is engaged and
willing to work toward change. Small considerations toward making
change or a willingness to discuss behavioral alternatives should be built
upon as they are strong indicators that real action steps toward change
can occur next.
METHODS TO ASSESS MOTIVATION, RESISTANCE, AND
READINESS TO CHANGE
Motivation and resistance exist along a continuum of readiness. When
assessing motivation and resistance of a client, it is important to
determine what stage of change a client is in. This will provide a social
worker with appropriate clinical strategies to use to address these issues.
If social workers push clients at a faster pace than they are ready to take,
the therapeutic alliance may break down.
A lack of motivation and resistance are often found in
precontemplation and contemplation before making the decision to
change. There can also be motivational challenges during preparation,
action, and maintenance, but they are more easily addressed. When
resistance occurs in these latter stages of change, a social worker should
reassess the problem and appropriateness of the intervention to ensure
that there have not been new developments in a client’s life that need to
287
be considered. They may be distracting a client from making progress or
serving as barriers to making real change.
In precontemplation, a client is unaware, unable, and/or unwilling to
change. In this stage, there is the greatest resistance and lack of
motivation. It can be characterized by arguing, interrupting, denial,
ignoring the problem, and/or avoiding talking or thinking about it. A client
may not even show up for appointments and does not agree that change
is needed.
A social worker can best deal with lack of motivation and resistance in
192
this stage by establishing a rapport, acknowledging resistance or
ambivalence, keeping conversation informal, trying to engage a client,
and recognizing a client’s thoughts, feelings, fears, and concerns.
In contemplation, a client is ambivalent or uncertain regarding
behavior change; thus, behaviors are unpredictable. In this stage, a client
may be willing to look at the pros and cons of behavior change, but is not
committed to working toward it.
A social worker can best deal with lack of motivation and resistance in
this stage by emphasizing a client’s free choice and responsibility, as well
as discussing the pros and cons of changing. It is also useful to discuss
how change will assist a client in achieving life goals. Fear can be
reduced by producing examples of change and clarifying what change is
and is not.
There are many self-motivating techniques that a client can use to
assist in reaching a goal. A social worker can assist a client in identifying
which of these techniques may be useful, as well as creating others that
may be helpful. Some common self-motivating techniques include a
client:
■ Visualizing goals, including using visual images on the refrigerator or i
a place that will remind a client of the desired aim
■ Reminding oneself of why change is needed
■ Making up a contract with oneself of steps that will be taken toward
reaching the desired end result
■ Rewarding oneself when progress is made on the goals
■ Taking a break to do something that is liked or be with a friend to sta
encouraged
■ Being around positive people who will encourage and not create
barriers to change
288
■ Educating oneself about steps that will assist in the change effort
■ Breaking down goals into achievable steps
■ Forgiving oneself when setbacks in progress occur
■ Conceptualizing a new reality or what life will be like when chang
happens
METHODS TO ASSESS THE CLIENT’S/CLIENT SYSTEM’S
COMMUNICATION SKILLS
Social workers must involve clients in every aspect of treatment. In order
to do so, social workers must assess clients’ communication skills and
determine effective methods to gather needed information, as well as to
ensure that clients understand data that is presented to them. Thus, the
expressive and receptive communication of clients must be considered.
As many clients may have experienced trauma, it is essential that
social workers understand how such experiences may impact on clients’
communication styles and patterns. Much of communication is also
cultural and should be viewed within the context of clients’ backgrounds
and experiences.
Silence is a form of communication and should be considered by a
social worker when used by a client.
Social workers should understand how to communicate with clients
who are upset and angry, as well as how some wording choices and
tones can be upsetting to clients based on their ethnic backgrounds
and/or past experiences, such as victimization.
METHODS TO ASSESS THE CLIENT’S/CLIENT SYSTEM’S
COPING ABILITIES
Social workers can learn a lot about clients’ difficulties by determining
how clients have attempted to cope with their problems in the past. The
coping abilities that clients employ give valuable clues about their
193
levels of stress and functioning. Investigation may indicate that clients
have few coping abilities, but rely on rigid patterns that are unhelpful or
cause further problems. Some clients follow avoidance pattern by
immersing themselves in work, withdrawing, or using drugs or alcohol.
289
Others attempt to cope by being aggressive or acting out. Lastly, others
become dependent and rely on family members or friends to manage
difficulties for them.
Exploring how clients have attempted to cope with problems may
reveal that they have struggled with the same or similar problems in the
past. As they are no longer able to manage, it is important to find out
what has changed (“why now?”). In order to assess coping skills, social
workers might want to ask about the extent to which clients:
■ Turn to work or other substitute activities to take their minds off things
■ Get upset and let their emotions out
■ Get advice from others about what to do
■ Concentrate on doing something about their problems
■ Put their trust in high beings
■ Laugh about their situations
■ Discuss their feelings with others
■ Use alcohol or drugs to make themselves feel better
■ Pretend that their problems do not exist
■ Seek out others who have similar experiences
THE INDICATORS OF CLIENT’S/CLIENT SYSTEM’S
STRENGTHS AND CHALLENGES
Strength is the capacity to cope with difficulties, to maintain functioning
under stress, to return to equilibrium in the face of significant trauma, to
use external challenges to promote growth, and to be resilient by using
social supports.
There is not a single approach to the assessment of strengths.
However, social workers can view all of these areas as strengths or
protective factors that can assist clients when they experience
challenges. These characteristics can also be abilities that need to be
bolstered as a focus of treatment.
Cognitive and Appraisal Skills
290
■ Intellectual/cognitive ability
■ Creativity and curiosity
■ Initiative, perseverance, and patience
■ Common sense
■ Ability to anticipate problems
■ Realistic appraisal of demands and capacities
■ Ability to use feedback
Defenses and Coping Mechanisms
■ Ability to regulate impulses and affect
■ Self-soothing
■ Flexible; can handle stressors
Temperamental and Dispositional Factors
■ Belief in trustworthiness of others
■ Belief in justice
■ Self-esteem and self-worth
■ Sense of mastery, confidence, and optimism
■ Ability to tolerate ambiguity and uncertainty
■ Ability to make sense of negative events
■ Sense of humor
■ Lack of hostility, anger, and anxiety
■ Optimistic and open
■ Ability to grieve
■ Lack of helplessness
■ Responsibility for decisions
■ Sense of direction, mission, and purpose
291
194
Interpersonal Skills and Supports
■ Ability to develop/maintain good relationships
■ Ability to confide in others
■ Problem-solving skills
■ Capacity for empathy
■ Presence of an intimate relationship
■ Sense of security
Other Factors
■ Supportive social institutions, such as church
■ Good physical health
■ Adequate income
■ Supportive family and friends
METHODS TO ASSESS EGO STRENGTHS
Ego strength is the ability of the ego to effectively deal with the demands
of the id, the superego, and reality. It is a basis for resilience and helps
maintain emotional stability by coping with internal and external stress.
Traits usually considered to be indicators of positive ego strengths
include tolerance of pain associated with loss, disappointment, shame, or
guilt; forgiveness of others, with feelings of compassion rather than
195
anger; persistence and perseverance in the pursuit of goals; and/or
openness, flexibility, and creativity in learning to adapt. Those with
positive ego strength are less likely to have psychiatric crises.
Other indicators of positive ego strength include clients:
■ Acknowledging their feelings—including grief, insecurity, lonelines
and anxiety
■ Not getting overwhelmed by their moods
■ Pushing forward after loss and not being paralyzed by self-pity
292
resentment
■ Using painful events to strengthen themselves
■ Knowing that painful feelings will eventually fade
■ Empathizing with others without trying to reduce or eliminate their pai
■ Being self-disciplined and fighting addictive urges
■ Taking responsibility for actions
■ Holding themselves accountable
■ Not blaming others
■ Accepting themselves with their limitations
■ Setting firm limits even if it means disappointing others or riskin
rejection
■ Avoiding people who drain them physically and/or emotionally
THE USE OF THE DIAGNOSTIC AND STATISTICAL MANUAL
OF MENTAL DISORDERS of THE AMERICAN PSYCHIATRIC
ASSOCIATION
The Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM) is used
by social workers and other mental health professionals as an
authoritative guide to the diagnosis of mental disorders. The DSM
contains descriptions, symptoms, and other criteria for diagnosing mental
disorders.
A social worker might give a client an other specified diagnosis if
the client is missing one or two of the symptoms that are necessary for a
diagnosis. For example, a diagnosis of generalized anxiety disorder
(GAD) requires that the client experience anxiety more days than not. A
social worker might see that a client has all the other symptoms of that
disorder and that anxiety is interfering with life, but the anxiety might not
show up on enough days to technically count as GAD. In that case, the
client could be diagnosed with other specified anxiety disorder. The social
worker would add a note to the diagnosis explaining the reason that the
diagnosis is not GAD.
An unspecified diagnosis is used when a social worker has
determined that a client’s challenges fall within a certain group of
293
disorders, but it’s not clear exactly which diagnosis in that group best
suits the client. The main difference is that an unspecified diagnosis
doesn’t include detailed information or the reason that the criteria for a
specific diagnosis are not met.
Specifiers are extensions to a diagnosis that further clarify the
course, severity, or special features of the client disorders or illnesses.
Specifiers allow for a more specific diagnosis that will help social workers
select more effective treatment for clients.
Neurodevelopmental Disorders
196
Intellectual Developmental Disorders
Intellectual developmental disorder (intellectual disability)
This disorder involves limitations in intellectual functioning (such as
reasoning, problem-solving, and learning) and adaptive behavior. It
begins during the developmental period and impacts an individual’s ability
to independently function in daily life.
Specify current severity: Mild, Moderate, Severe, and Profound
Global developmental delay
Unspecified intellectual developmental disorder (intellectual disability)
Communication Disorders
This category includes disorders such as language disorder (difficulties in
language expression or comprehension) and speech sound disorder
(pronunciation difficulties), among others. These disorders impact
effective communication skills.
Language disorder
Speech sound disorder
Childhood-onset fluency disorder (stuttering)
Note: Later-onset cases are diagnosed as adult-onset fluency
disorder.
Social (pragmatic) communication disorder
294
This disorder involves difficulties in using and understanding verbal and
nonverbal communication for social purposes. Individuals struggle to
effectively use language in social contexts.
Unspecified communication disorder
Autism Spectrum Disorder
Autism spectrum disorder (ASD)
ASD is characterized by difficulties in social communication and
interaction, as well as restricted and repetitive patterns of behavior,
interests, or activities. Symptoms vary widely in severity, and early
intervention is crucial for improving outcomes.
Specify current severity: Requiring very substantial support,
Requiring substantial support, Requiring support
Specify if: With or without accompanying intellectual impairment,
With or without accompanying language impairment
Specify if: Associated with a known genetic or other medical
condition or environmental factor; Associated with a
neurodevelopmental, mental, or behavioral problem
Specify if: With catatonia
Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder
Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD)
ADHD is marked by persistent patterns of inattention, hyperactivity, and
impulsivity that can interfere with daily functioning and development. It
commonly starts in childhood and may persist into adulthood.
Specify if: In partial remission
197
Specify current severity: Mild, Moderate, and Severe
Specify whether: Combined presentation, Predominantly inattentive
presentation, Predominantly hyperactive/impulsive presentation,
other specified attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder, unspecified
attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder
Specific Learning Disorder
Specific learning disorder
Individuals with this disorder struggle with specific academic skills, such
as reading, writing, or mathematics, despite having average or above-
295
average intelligence. These difficulties significantly interfere with
academic achievement or daily activities.
Specify current severity: Mild, Moderate, and Severe
Specify if: With impairment in reading (specify if with word reading
accuracy, reading rate or fluency, and reading comprehension); With
impairment in written expression (specify if with spelling accuracy,
grammar and punctuation accuracy, clarity or organization of written
expression); With impairment in mathematics (specify if with number
sense, memorization of arithmetic facts, accurate or fluent
calculation, accurate math reasoning)
Motor Disorders
This category includes disorders such as developmental coordination
disorder (difficulty with motor coordination and physical tasks) and
Tourette’s disorder (presence of both motor and vocal tics).
Developmental coordination disorder
Stereotypic movement disorder
Specify if: With self-injurious behavior, Without self-injurious
behavior
Specify if: Associated with a known genetic or other medical
condition, neurodevelopmental disorder, or environmental factor
Specify current severity: Mild, Moderate, and Severe
Tic disorders
Apart from Tourette’s disorder, this category includes persistent (chronic)
motor or vocal tic disorder (single or multiple motor or vocal tics present
for more than a year) and provisional tic disorder (tics present for less
than a year).
Tourette’s disorder
Persistent (chronic) motor or vocal tic disorder
Specify if: With motor tics only, With vocal tics only
Provisional tic disorder
Other specified tic disorder
296
Unspecified tic disorder
Other Neurodevelopmental Disorders
Other specified neurodevelopmental disorder
Unspecified neurodevelopmental disorder
Schizophrenia Spectrum and Other Psychotic Disorders
198
The following specifiers apply to schizophrenia spectrum and other
psychotic disorders where indicated:
Specify if: The following course specifiers are only to be used after a
1-year duration of the disorder: First episode, currently in acute
episode; First episode, currently in partial remission; First episode,
currently in full remission; Multiple episodes, currently in acute
episode; Multiple episodes, currently in partial remission; Multiple
episodes, currently in full remission; Continuous; Unspecified
Specify if: With catatonia
Specify current severity of delusions, hallucinations, disorganized
speech, abnormal psychomotor behavior, negative symptoms,
impaired cognition, depression, and mania symptoms
Schizotypal (personality) disorder
Delusional disorder
Individuals with this disorder have non-bizarre delusions (false beliefs that
could be plausible) that are present for at least 1 month. These delusions
significantly impact their daily lives, but other aspects of functioning
remain relatively intact.
Specify whether: Erotomanic type, Grandiose type, Jealous type,
Persecutory type, Somatic type, Mixed type, and Unspecified
typeSpecify if: With bizarre content
Brief psychotic disorder
This disorder is characterized by the sudden onset of psychotic
symptoms such as hallucinations, delusions, disorganized speech, or
grossly disorganized or catatonic behavior. The duration is brief, lasting
less than 1 month, with eventual return to full premorbid functioning.
Specify if: With marked stressor(s), Without marked stressor(s), With
peripartum onset
297
Schizophreniform disorder
Similar to schizophrenia, this disorder involves the presence of symptoms
like delusions, hallucinations, disorganized speech, and/or negative
symptoms. However, the duration of these symptoms is shorter, lasting
between 1 and 6 months.
Specify if: With good prognostic features, Without good prognostic
features
Schizophrenia
Schizophrenia is a complex disorder characterized by a range of
symptoms including delusions (false beliefs), hallucinations (false sensory
perceptions), disorganized thinking and speech, grossly disorganized or
catatonic behavior, and negative symptoms (diminished emotional
expression or motivation). These symptoms significantly impair an
individual’s ability to function in daily life.
Schizoaffective disorder
This disorder combines symptoms of schizophrenia (hallucinations,
delusions) with prominent mood episodes (depression or mania). These
mood episodes occur alongside periods of psychosis but are not solely
due to mood disturbances.
Specify whether: Bipolar type, Depressive type
199
Substance/medication-induced psychotic disorder
Psychotic symptoms (hallucinations, delusions, etc.) emerge due to
substance intoxication, withdrawal, or after exposure to a medication.
These symptoms are not better explained by a primary psychotic
disorder.
Specify if: With onset during intoxication, With onset during
withdrawal, With onset after medication use
Psychotic disorder due to another medical condition
Psychotic symptoms arise as a direct result of a medical condition (such
as a neurological disorder or endocrine disorder). The symptoms are not
better explained by another primary psychotic disorder.
Specify whether: With delusions, With hallucinations
Catatonia associated with another mental disorder (catatonia specifier)
Catatonic symptoms, such as motoric immobility or excessive motor
activity, are present in the context of another mental disorder (e.g., mood
298
disorders, schizophrenia).
Catatonic disorder due to another medical condition
Catatonic symptoms are directly caused by a medical condition, such as
neurodevelopmental or neurological disorders.
Unspecified catatonia
Diagnosis is applied when the catatonic symptoms are present and
causing distress or impairment, but they do not neatly fit into any of the
more specific diagnostic categories within the catatonia-related disorders.
Other specified schizophrenia spectrum and other psychotic disorder
This diagnosis includes presentations of psychotic symptoms that do not
fit neatly into the other defined categories but still warrant clinical
attention.
Unspecified schizophrenia spectrum and other psychotic disorder
This diagnosis is used when the symptoms do not meet criteria for any
specific psychotic disorder but still cause significant distress or
impairment.
Bipolar and Related Disorders
The following specifiers apply to bipolar and related disorders where
indicated:
Specify: With anxious distress (specify current severity: mild,
moderate, moderate-severe, and severe); With mixed features; With
rapid cycling; With melancholic features; With atypical features; With
mood-congruent psychotic features; With mood incongruent
psychotic features; With catatonia; With peripartum onset; With
seasonal pattern
Specify: With anxious distress (specify current severity: mild,
moderate, moderate-severe, and severe); With mixed features; With
rapid cycling; With peripartum onset; With seasonal pattern
Bipolar I disorder
200
This disorder involves the occurrence of at least one manic episode,
which is a distinct period of abnormally elevated or irritable mood, along
with potential episodes of major depressive or hypomanic episodes. The
manic episode may include symptoms such as increased energy,
decreased need for sleep, racing thoughts, and risky behavior.
299
Current or most recent episode manic: Mild, Moderate, Severe, With
psychotic features, In partial remission, In full remission,
Unspecified, Current or most recent episode hypomanic, In partial
remission, In full remission, Unspecified
Current or most recent episode depressed: Mild, Moderate, Severe,
With psychotic features, In partial remission, In full remission,
Unspecified
Current or most recent episode unspecified
Bipolar II disorder
This disorder is characterized by at least one major depressive episode
and at least one hypomanic episode. Hypomania is similar to mania but
with less severe symptoms and less impairment in daily functioning.
Specify current or most recent episode: Hypomanic, Depressed
Specify course if full criteria for a mood episode are not currently
met: In partial remission, In full remission
Specify severity if full criteria for a major depressive episode are
currently met: Mild, Moderate, and Severe
Cyclothymic disorder
Individuals with this disorder experience numerous periods of hypomanic
symptoms and depressive symptoms that do not meet the criteria for
major depressive or manic episodes. These mood fluctuations are
chronic and persist for at least two years in adults (one year in children
and adolescents).
Specify if: With anxious distress (specify current severity: Mild,
Moderate, Moderate-Severe, and Severe)
Substance/medication-induced bipolar and related disorder
Mood episodes (manic, depressive, or mixed) are caused by substance
intoxication, withdrawal, or medication effects. The symptoms are not
better explained by a primary mood disorder.
Specify if: With onset during intoxication, With onset during
withdrawal, With onset after medication use
Bipolar and related disorder due to another medical condition
Mood disturbances, including manic or depressive symptoms, are directly
attributed to the physiological effects of a medical condition, such as a
neurological disorder or endocrine disorder.
300
Specify if: With manic features, With manic- or hypomanic-like
episode, With mixed features
Other specified bipolar and related disorder
201
This diagnosis includes presentations of bipolar symptoms that do not
fit neatly into the other defined categories but still warrant clinical
attention. This could involve atypical symptom patterns or specific
circumstances.
Unspecified bipolar and related disorder
This diagnosis is used when the symptoms do not meet criteria for any
specific bipolar or related disorder but still cause significant distress or
impairment.
Unspecified mood disorder
Diagnosis is applied when a person experiences mood-related symptoms
that don’t align with the specific criteria for disorders such as major
depressive disorder, bipolar disorder, or others within the mood disorder
category.
Depressive Disorders
Disruptive mood dysregulation disorder
This diagnosis is typically made in children and adolescents who
experience severe and frequent temper outbursts that are out of
proportion to the situation. The mood between outbursts is persistently
irritable or angry. It is a way to differentiate this pattern from early-onset
bipolar disorder.
Major depressive disorder (MDD)
Also known as clinical depression, MDD involves persistent feelings of
sadness, loss of interest or pleasure in activities (anhedonia), and a
range of other symptoms such as changes in appetite or sleep patterns,
fatigue, feelings of worthlessness or guilt, difficulty concentrating, and
even thoughts of death or suicide. To receive a diagnosis, a person must
experience these symptoms for at least two weeks.
Specify: With anxious distress (specify current severity: mild,
moderate, moderate-severe, and severe); With mixed features; With
melancholic features; With atypical features; With mood-congruent
psychotic features; With mood-incongruent psychotic features; With
catatonia; With peripartum onset; With seasonal pattern
301
Single episode: Mild, Moderate, Severe, With psychotic features, In
partial remission, In full remission, Unspecified
Recurrent episode: Mild, Moderate, Severe, With psychotic features,
In partial remission, In full remission, Unspecified
Persistent depressive disorder
This disorder involves chronic low-grade depression lasting for at least
two years in adults (one year in children or adolescents). The symptoms
are less severe than in MDD but are still impactful, and they can include
changes in appetite or sleep, fatigue, low self-esteem, and difficulty
making decisions.
Specify: With anxious distress (specify current severity: mild,
moderate, moderate-severe, and severe); With atypical features
Specify if: In partial remission, In full remission
Specify if: Early onset, Late onset
Specify if: With pure dysthymic syndrome; With persistent major
202
depressive episode; With intermittent major depressive episodes,
with current episode; With intermittent major depressive episodes,
without current episode
Specify current severity: Mild, Moderate, and Severe
Premenstrual dysphoric disorder
This disorder involves severe mood disturbances that occur in the week
before menstruation and improve shortly after menstruation begins.
Symptoms include mood swings, irritability, anxiety, and physical
symptoms like bloating or fatigue.
Substance/medication-induced depressive disorder
Depressive symptoms arise due to substance intoxication, withdrawal, or
as a side effect of a medication. These symptoms are not better
explained by a primary depressive disorder.
Specify if: With onset during intoxication, With onset during
withdrawal, With onset after medication use
Depressive disorder due to another medical condition
Depressive symptoms emerge as a direct result of a medical condition,
such as a neurological disorder or endocrine disorder. The symptoms are
not better explained by another primary depressive disorder.
Specify if: With depressive features, With major depressive—like
episode, With mixed features
302
Other specified depressive disorder
This diagnosis includes presentations of depressive symptoms that do
not fit neatly into the other defined categories but still warrant clinical
attention. This could involve atypical symptom patterns or specific
circumstances.
Unspecified depressive disorder
This diagnosis is used when the symptoms do not meet criteria for any
specific depressive disorder but still cause significant distress or
impairment.
Unspecified mood disorder
Diagnosis is often applied when the presentation of symptoms is not well-
defined or when the symptoms are atypical.
Anxiety Disorders
Separation anxiety disorder
Primarily diagnosed in children, separation anxiety disorder involves
excessive distress and anxiety related to separation from attachment
figures or home. These fears go beyond what’s developmentally
appropriate and can impact daily functioning.
Selective mutism
203
Selective mutism is characterized by consistent failure to speak in
specific social situations despite speaking in other settings. This typically
occurs due to anxiety or discomfort.
Specific phobia
Specific phobia involves an intense and irrational fear of a specific object
or situation, such as heights, animals, or flying. This fear causes
immediate anxiety and may lead to avoidance behavior.
Specify if: Animal, Natural environment, Blood-injection-injury, Fear
of blood, Fear of injections and transfusions, Fear of other medical
care, Fear of injury, Situational, Other
Social anxiety disorder
People with social anxiety disorder experience intense fear and anxiety in
social situations due to a fear of being judged, embarrassed, or
humiliated. This fear leads to avoidance of social interactions.
Specify if: Performance only
303
Panic disorder
Panic disorder involves recurrent and unexpected panic attacks, which
are intense periods of fear or discomfort that reach a peak within minutes.
Panic attacks can be accompanied by physical symptoms such as heart
palpitations, sweating, trembling, and a fear of losing control or dying.
Panic attack specifier
Agoraphobia
Agoraphobia is marked by a fear of situations where escape might be
difficult or help might not be available if a panic attack or other distressing
symptoms occur. Individuals often avoid places or situations that trigger
this fear.
Generalized anxiety disorder (GAD)
GAD is characterized by excessive and persistent worry and anxiety
about various life situations or events, often without a specific trigger. This
worry is difficult to control and is associated with physical symptoms such
as restlessness, muscle tension, and fatigue.
Substance/medication-induced anxiety disorder
Anxiety symptoms arise due to substance intoxication, withdrawal, or as a
side effect of medication. These symptoms are not better explained by a
primary anxiety disorder.
Specify if: With onset during intoxication, With onset during
withdrawal, With onset after medication use
Anxiety disorder due to another medical condition
Anxiety symptoms emerge as a direct result of a medical condition, such
as a neurological disorder or endocrine disorder. The symptoms are not
better explained by another primary anxiety disorder.
Other specified anxiety disorder
204
This diagnosis includes presentations of anxiety symptoms that do
not fit neatly into the other defined categories but still warrant clinical
attention. This could involve atypical symptom patterns or specific
circumstances.
Unspecified anxiety disorder
This diagnosis is used when the symptoms do not meet criteria for any
specific anxiety disorder but still cause significant distress or impairment.
304
Obsessive-Compulsive and Related Disorders
The following specifier applies to obsessive-compulsive and related
disorders where indicated:
Specify if: With good or fair insight, With poor insight, With absent
insight/delusional beliefs
Obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD)
OCD is characterized by the presence of obsessions and/or compulsions.
Obsessions are intrusive and distressing thoughts, images, or urges that
cause significant anxiety. Compulsions are repetitive behaviors or mental
acts performed to alleviate the distress caused by obsessions. These
behaviors are often time-consuming and interfere with daily life.
Specify if: Tic-related
Body dysmorphic disorder (BDD)
Individuals with BDD have an intense preoccupation with perceived flaws
or defects in their physical appearance, which are not noticeable to others
or are very minor. This obsession leads to distress and often results in
behaviors like checking mirrors excessively or seeking cosmetic
procedures.
Specify if: With muscle dysmorphia
Hoarding disorder
People with this disorder excessively accumulate and struggle to discard
possessions, regardless of their value. This behavior leads to clutter that
significantly impairs living spaces and daily functioning.
Specify if: With excessive acquisition
Trichotillomania (hair-pulling disorder)
Individuals repetitively pull out their own hair, often leading to noticeable
hair loss. This behavior is usually driven by tension or an urge and may
be an attempt to alleviate distress.
Excoriation (skin-picking) disorder
This disorder involves recurrent and compulsive picking of one’s own
skin, resulting in skin lesions. This behavior is typically driven by the urge
to remove perceived imperfections or relieve tension.
Substance/medication-induced obsessive-compulsive and related
205
disorder
305
Obsessive-compulsive or related symptoms arise due to substance
intoxication, withdrawal, or as a side effect of medication. These
symptoms are not better explained by a primary obsessive-compulsive or
related disorder.
Specify if: With onset during intoxication, With onset during
withdrawal, With onset after medication use
Obsessive-compulsive and related disorder due to another medical
condition
Obsessive-compulsive or related symptoms emerge as a direct result of a
medical condition, such as a neurological disorder or endocrine disorder.
The symptoms are not better explained by another primary obsessive-
compulsive or related disorder.
Specify if: With obsessive-compulsive disorder—like symptoms, With
appearance preoccupations, With hoarding symptoms, With hair-
pulling symptoms, With skin-picking symptoms
Other specified obsessive-compulsive and related disorder
This diagnosis includes presentations of obsessive-compulsive or related
symptoms that do not fit neatly into the other defined categories but still
warrant clinical attention. This could involve atypical symptom patterns or
specific circumstances.
Unspecified obsessive-compulsive and related disorder
This diagnosis is used when the symptoms do not meet criteria for any
specific obsessive-compulsive or related disorder but still cause
significant distress or impairment.
Trauma- and Stressor-Related Disorders
Reactive attachment disorder
Typically diagnosed in children, this disorder involves significantly
disturbed and developmentally inappropriate social interactions due to
early neglect, deprivation, or other forms of trauma. Children with this
disorder may struggle to form appropriate emotional bonds.
Specify if: Persistent
Specify current severity: Severe
Disinhibited social engagement disorder
Also diagnosed in children, this disorder manifests as a pattern of overly
familiar behavior with unfamiliar individuals, often due to a history of
306
neglect or multiple caregivers. Children with this disorder may lack
appropriate social boundaries.
Specify if: Persistent
Specify current severity: Severe
Posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD)
206
PTSD occurs after exposure to traumatic events, causing symptoms
like intrusive memories, nightmares, flashbacks, avoidance of reminders,
negative changes in mood and cognition, and increased arousal.
Symptoms may significantly impair daily functioning.
Specify whether: With dissociative symptoms
Specify if: With delayed expression
Posttraumatic stress disorder in individuals older than 6 years
Posttraumatic stress disorder in children 6 years and younger
Acute stress disorder
Similar to PTSD, acute stress disorder involves symptoms like intrusion,
negative mood, dissociation, avoidance, and arousal, but these
symptoms arise immediately after exposure to a traumatic event and last
up to a month, while PTSD symptoms present slower and last longer,
especially if not treated.
Adjustment disorders
These are characterized by emotional or behavioral symptoms that arise
in response to an identifiable stressor. Symptoms may include sadness,
anxiety, or behavior changes. The stressor’s impact exceeds what is
typically expected in relation to the event.
Specify if: Acute, Persistent (chronic)
Specify whether: With depressed mood, With anxiety, With mixed
anxiety and depressed mood, With disturbance of conduct, With
mixed disturbance of emotions and conduct, Unspecified
Prolonged grief disorder
This diagnosis refers to an intense and prolonged form of grief that
extends beyond the expected period of mourning. It is characterized by a
persistent and severe longing for the deceased individual, along with
emotional pain and difficulty adapting to life without them.
Other specified trauma- and stressor-related disorder
307
This diagnosis includes presentations of trauma- or stressor-related
symptoms that do not fit neatly into the other defined categories but still
warrant clinical attention. This could involve atypical symptom patterns or
specific circumstances.
Unspecified trauma- and stressor-related disorder
This diagnosis is used when the symptoms do not meet the criteria for
any specific trauma- and-stressor-related disorder but still cause
significant distress or impairment.
Dissociative Disorders
Dissociative identity disorder (DID)
Formerly known as multiple personality disorder, DID involves the
presence of two or more distinct identity states that control an individual’s
behavior, thoughts, and feelings. Gaps in memory, awareness, and
personal information are common between these identity states.
Dissociative amnesia
207
This disorder involves memory gaps related to personal information,
often about traumatic or stressful events. It can be localized (specific time
period), selective (specific events), generalized (overall identity and life
history), or continuous (ongoing inability to recall new information).
Specify if: With dissociative fugue
Depersonalization/derealization disorder
Depersonalization is characterized by feelings of detachment from
oneself, as if observing from outside the body. Derealization involves a
sense of unreality or detachment from the surroundings. These
experiences are distressing and can impair daily functioning.
Other specified dissociative disorder
This diagnosis includes presentations of dissociative symptoms that do
not fit neatly into the other defined categories but still warrant clinical
attention. This could involve atypical symptom patterns or specific
circumstances.
Unspecified dissociative disorder
This diagnosis is used when the symptoms do not meet criteria for any
specific dissociative disorder but still cause significant distress or
impairment.
308
Somatic Symptom and Related Disorders
Somatic symptom disorder
This disorder involves excessive and distressing thoughts, feelings, and
behaviors related to physical symptoms. Individuals may have a
preoccupation with their symptoms and experience significant distress or
impairment due to these concerns.
Specify if: With predominant pain
Specify if: Persistent
Specify current severity: Mild, Moderate, and Severe
Illness anxiety disorder
Formerly known as hypochondriasis, this disorder involves excessive
worry about having a serious illness, despite minimal or no medical
evidence to support the belief. Individuals often misinterpret normal bodily
sensations as signs of a severe medical condition.
Specify whether: Care-seeking type, Care-avoidant type
Functional neurological symptom disorder (conversion disorder)
This disorder involves neurological symptoms that can’t be explained by a
medical condition. These symptoms may resemble those of a
neurological disorder, such as paralysis or blindness, but they are not
caused by a physiological issue.
Specify if: Acute episode, Persistent
208
Specify if: With psychological stressor (specify stressor), Without
psychological stressor
Specify symptom type: With weakness or paralysis, With abnormal
movement, With swallowing symptoms, With speech symptom, With
attacks or seizures, With anesthesia or sensory loss, With special
sensory symptom, With mixed symptoms
Psychological factors affecting other medical conditions
A disorder that is diagnosed when a general medical condition is
adversely affected by psychological or behavioral factors; the factors may
precipitate or exacerbate the medical condition, interfere with treatment,
or contribute to morbidity and mortality.
Specify current severity: Mild, Moderate, Severe, and Extreme
Factitious disorder
Specify: Single episode, Recurrent episodes
309
Factitious disorder imposed on self
In this disorder, individuals intentionally falsify, exaggerate, or induce
physical or psychological symptoms in themselves for the purpose of
assuming a “sick role.” There is no apparent external reward, such
as financial gain.
Factitious disorder imposed on another
Formerly known as Munchausen syndrome by proxy, in this disorder,
individuals falsify, exaggerate, or induce physical or psychological
symptoms in another person, often someone under their care, to
assume a caregiver role. There is no apparent external reward.
Other specified somatic symptom and related disorder
This diagnosis includes presentations of somatic and related symptoms
that do not fit neatly into the other defined categories but still warrant
clinical attention. This could involve atypical symptom patterns or specific
circumstances.
Unspecified somatic symptom and related disorder
This diagnosis is used when the symptoms do not meet criteria for any
specific somatic symptom and related disorder but still cause significant
distress or impairment.
Feeding and Eating Disorders
These disorders involve disruptions in eating behaviors, such as
avoidant/restrictive food intake disorder (extreme pickiness) and can lead
to nutritional deficiencies or developmental problems.
The following specifiers apply to feeding and eating disorders where
indicated:
Specify if: In remission
Specify if: In partial remission, In full remission
Specify current severity: Mild, Moderate, Severe, and Extreme
Pica
209
Pica involves eating non-nutritive, non-food substances over a period
of at least one month, and the behavior is developmentally inappropriate.
Common substances ingested might include paper, clay, hair, cloth, or
string.
In children
In adults
310
Rumination disorder
This disorder involves the repeated regurgitation of food, which may be
re-chewed, re-swallowed, or spit out. It’s not due to a medical condition
and lasts for at least one month.
Avoidant/restrictive food intake disorder (ARFID)
ARFID involves an extreme limitation in food intake, often due to sensory
sensitivities, concerns about adverse consequences, or lack of interest in
eating. It is not driven by concerns about weight or body shape.
Anorexia nervosa
Anorexia involves severe restriction of food intake, leading to significantly
low body weight. Fear of gaining weight and distorted body image are
common. It often involves intense efforts to control weight through dieting,
excessive exercise, or other behaviors.
Specify whether: Restricting type, Binge-eating/purging type
Bulimia nervosa
Bulimia involves recurrent episodes of binge eating followed by
compensatory behaviors like vomiting, excessive exercise, or laxative use
to prevent weight gain. It’s often characterized by a cycle of bingeing and
purging.
Binge-eating disorder (BED)
BED involves recurrent episodes of eating large amounts of food in a
short period, with a sense of lack of control during the binge. Unlike
bulimia, there are no regular compensatory behaviors.
Other specified feeding or eating disorder
This diagnosis includes presentations of feeding and eating symptoms
that do not fit neatly into the other defined categories but still warrant
clinical attention. This could involve atypical symptom patterns or specific
circumstances.
Unspecified feeding or eating disorder
This diagnosis is used when the symptoms do not meet criteria for any
specific feeding and eating disorder but still cause significant distress or
impairment.
Elimination Disorders
311
Enuresis
Enuresis refers to the repeated involuntary urination in inappropriate
places, typically occurring during sleep (nocturnal enuresis) or during
waking hours (diurnal enuresis). The behavior is considered
210
developmentally inappropriate and typically occurs in children who
are old enough to have bladder control.
Specify whether: Nocturnal only, Diurnal only, Nocturnal and diurnal
Encopresis
Encopresis involves the repeated involuntary passage of feces in
inappropriate places, often after the age when bowel control is expected.
This behavior is not due to a medical condition and typically occurs in
children.
Specify whether: With constipation and overflow incontinence,
Without constipation and overflow incontinence
Other specified elimination disorder
With urinary symptoms
This subcategory would include cases where the individual
experiences problematic patterns related to urination, but the
symptoms do not meet the criteria for enuresis or other well-defined
disorders. The symptoms might involve issues with urgency,
frequency, or other urinary difficulties.
With fecal symptoms
This subcategory would include cases where the individual
experiences problematic patterns related to bowel movements or
feces, but the symptoms do not meet the criteria for encopresis or
other specific disorders. The symptoms might involve issues with
soiling, discomfort, or other fecal-related difficulties.
Unspecified elimination disorder
With urinary symptoms
With fecal symptoms
Sleep–Wake Disorders
The following specifiers apply to sleep–wake disorders where indicated:
Specify if: Episodic, Persistent, and Recurrent
Specify if: Acute, Subacute, and Persistent
Specify current severity: Mild, Moderate, and Severe
312
Insomnia disorder
Insomnia involves difficulty falling asleep, staying asleep, or experiencing
non-restorative sleep, despite having adequate opportunity for sleep. This
pattern leads to significant daytime distress or impairment.
Specify if: With mental disorder, With medical condition, With
another sleep disorder
Hypersomnolence disorder
Individuals with hypersomnolence experience excessive daytime
sleepiness, which often results in prolonged sleep episodes during the
day. Despite getting sufficient sleep, they struggle to stay awake and
alert.
Specify if: With mental disorder, With medical condition, With
another sleep disorder
Narcolepsy
211
Narcolepsy is characterized by excessive daytime sleepiness and
sudden, uncontrollable episodes of falling asleep during the day. It may
also involve cataplexy (sudden loss of muscle tone), sleep paralysis, and
hallucinations during sleep onset or upon awakening.
Specify whether: Narcolepsy with cataplexy or hypocretin deficiency
(type 1); narcolepsy without cataplexy and either without hypocretin
deficiency or hypocretin unmeasured (type 2); narcolepsy with
cataplexy or hypocretin deficiency due to a medical condition;
narcolepsy without cataplexy and without hypocretin deficiency due
to a medical condition
Breathing-related sleep disorders
This category includes sleep disorders caused by disrupted breathing
patterns, such as obstructive sleep apnea, central sleep apnea, and
sleep-related hypoventilation disorders. These disorders often lead to
disrupted sleep and excessive daytime sleepiness.
Obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea
Central sleep apnea
Specify current severity
Specify whether: Idiopathic central sleep apnea, Cheyne-Stokes
breathing, Central sleep apnea comorbid with opioid use
313
Sleep-related hypoventilation
Specify current severity
Specify whether: Idiopathic hypoventilation, Congenital central
alveolar hypoventilation, Comorbid sleep-related hypoventilation
Circadian rhythm sleep–wake disorders
Circadian rhythm sleep–wake disorders involve disruptions in the sleep–
wake schedule due to misalignment with the body’s natural circadian
rhythms. Conditions like delayed sleep phase disorder and shift work
disorder are examples.
Specify whether: Delayed sleep phase type (specify if: Familial,
Overlapping with non-24-hour sleep–wake type); Advanced sleep
phase type (specify if: Familial); Irregular sleep-wake type; Non-24-
hour sleep–wake type; Shift work type; Unspecified type
Parasomnias
Parasomnias are abnormal behaviors or experiences during sleep or
during transitions between sleep stages. Examples include sleepwalking,
sleep terrors, nightmares, and REM sleep behavior disorder.
Non-rapid eye movement sleep arousal disorders
Specify whether: Sleepwalking type (specify if: With sleep-related
eating, With sleep-related sexual behavior [sexsomnia]), Sleep terror
type
Nightmare disorder
212
Specify if: During sleep onset
Specify if: With mental disorder, With medical condition, With
another sleep disorder
Rapid eye movement sleep behavior disorder
Restless legs syndrome
Substance/medication-induced sleep disorder
Specify whether: Insomnia type, Daytime sleepiness type,
Parasomnia type, and Mixed type
Specify if: With onset during intoxication, With onset during
withdrawal, With onset after medication use
Other specified insomnia disorder
314
This diagnosis is used when an individual experiences symptoms of
insomnia that do not meet the full criteria for insomnia disorder, but still
warrant clinical attention. This might include atypical patterns of difficulty
falling asleep, staying asleep, or experiencing non-restorative sleep that
cause distress or impairment. The symptoms may not fit all the specific
criteria for insomnia disorder, but they are still significant enough to
require assessment and possible intervention.
Unspecified insomnia disorder
This diagnosis is used when an individual experiences symptoms of
insomnia causing distress or impairment, but the specific nature of the
symptoms or their relationship to other sleep disorders is not fully
understood. In other words, the symptoms meet the general criteria for
insomnia, but they do not meet criteria for any specific subtype or
diagnosis within the insomnia disorder category.
Other specified hypersomnolence disorder
This diagnosis is used when an individual experiences excessive daytime
sleepiness that does not meet the full criteria for hypersomnolence
disorder, but the symptoms still require clinical attention. This could
involve atypical patterns of daytime sleepiness, sleep attacks, or difficulty
staying awake during appropriate waking hours.
Unspecified hypersomnolence disorder
This diagnosis is used when an individual experiences significant
excessive daytime sleepiness causing distress or impairment, but the
specific nature of the symptoms or their relationship to other sleep
disorders is not fully understood. The symptoms meet the general criteria
for excessive daytime sleepiness, but they do not meet criteria for any
specific subtype or diagnosis within the hypersomnolence disorder
category.
Other specified sleep–wake disorder
This diagnosis includes presentations of sleep–wake symptoms that do
not fit neatly into the other defined categories but still warrant clinical
attention. This could involve atypical symptom patterns or specific
circumstances.
Unspecified sleep–wake disorder
213
315
This diagnosis includes presentations of sleep–wake symptoms that do
not fit neatly into the other defined categories but still warrant clinical
attention. This could involve atypical symptom patterns or specific
circumstances.
Sexual Dysfunctions
The following specifiers apply to sexual dysfunctions where indicated:
Specify whether: Lifelong, Acquired
Specify whether: Generalized, Situational
Specify current severity: Mild, Moderate, and Severe
Delayed ejaculation
Delayed ejaculation involves a significant delay or absence of ejaculation
during sexual activity, despite adequate sexual arousal and stimulation.
This issue causes distress or impairment.
Erectile disorder
Erectile disorder (previously known as erectile dysfunction) involves
persistent difficulty achieving or maintaining an erection sufficient for
satisfactory sexual performance. The issue causes distress or
impairment.
Female orgasmic disorder
This disorder involves a delay, absence, or reduced intensity of orgasm
during sexual activity, even when arousal and stimulation are adequate.
The difficulty in achieving orgasm causes distress or impairment.
Specify if: Never experienced an orgasm under any situation
Female sexual interest/arousal disorder
This disorder involves a persistent or recurrent deficiency in sexual
interest, thoughts, or arousal. Individuals may have difficulty becoming
sexually aroused or maintaining arousal during sexual activity, leading to
distress or impairment.
Genito-pelvic pain/penetration disorder
This disorder involves persistent or recurrent pain during intercourse,
difficulty with vaginal penetration, or fear or anxiety about pain during
sexual activity. The pain or fear causes distress or impairment.
Male hypoactive sexual desire disorder
316
This disorder involves a persistent or recurrent lack of interest in sexual
activity, often accompanied by reduced sexual thoughts or fantasies. The
lack of sexual desire causes distress or impairment in the individual’s life.
Premature (early) ejaculation
214
Premature ejaculation involves the recurrent ejaculation before or
shortly after penetration during sexual activity, often with minimal sexual
stimulation. The timing of ejaculation causes distress or impairment.
Substance/medication-induced sexual dysfunction
Diagnosis refers to the development of sexual dysfunction as a result of
substance use or medication. This category recognizes that certain
substances and medications can have a direct impact on sexual function,
leading to changes in sexual desire, arousal, and performance.
Specify if: With onset during intoxication, With onset during
withdrawal, With onset after medication use
Other specified sexual dysfunction
This diagnosis includes presentations of sexual dysfunction symptoms
that do not meet the criteria for any specific sexual dysfunction but still
warrant clinical attention. This could involve atypical symptom patterns or
specific circumstances.
Unspecified sexual dysfunction
This diagnosis is used when the symptoms of sexual dysfunction cause
distress or impairment, but the specific nature of the dysfunction or its
relationship to other sexual disorders is not fully understood.
Gender Dysphoria
Gender dysphoria is a diagnostic category that pertains to individuals
whose emotional and psychological identity as male, female, or another
gender does not align with their birth-assigned sex. This category
replaced the previous diagnosis of gender identity disorder and reflects a
more affirming and understanding approach to individuals experiencing
gender incongruence.
The following specifier and note apply to gender dysphoria where
indicated:
Specify if: With a disorder/difference of sex development
Gender dysphoria
317
Gender dysphoria in children
This diagnosis is given when a child experiences a marked
incongruence between their experienced/expressed gender and their
assigned sex at birth. The child may express a desire to be of a
different gender, to be treated as a different gender, or assert that
they are of a different gender.
Gender dysphoria in adolescents and adults
Similar to the diagnosis in children, this diagnosis is given when
adolescents and adults experience a marked incongruence between
their experienced/expressed gender and their assigned sex at birth.
The individual may experience significant distress related to the
incongruence and may seek social, hormonal, or surgical
interventions to bring their body and gender identity into alignment.
Specify if: Posttransition
Other specified gender dysphoria
This diagnosis is used when an individual’s gender-related
215
experiences do not fully meet the criteria for gender dysphoria in children,
adolescents, or adults, but they still warrant clinical attention. This could
include atypical patterns of gender identity, expression, or incongruence
that do not align with the specific criteria of other diagnoses. The
individual may experience some degree of distress or impairment related
to their gender identity.
Unspecified gender dysphoria
This category is used when an individual’s gender-related experiences do
not fully meet the criteria for gender dysphoria in children, adolescents, or
adults, but they still warrant clinical attention. This could include atypical
patterns of gender identity, expression, or incongruence that do not align
with the specific criteria of other diagnoses. The individual may
experience some degree of distress or impairment related to their gender
identity.
Disruptive, Impulse-Control, and Conduct Disorders
Oppositional defiant disorder (ODD)
ODD involves a pattern of defiant, hostile, and disobedient behavior
directed toward authority figures. Individuals with ODD may often argue
with adults, refuse to comply with rules, and deliberately annoy others.
318
This behavior is consistent and causes significant distress or impairment
in social, academic, or occupational functioning.
Specify current severity: Mild, Moderate, and Severe
Intermittent explosive disorder
This disorder involves recurrent episodes of impulsive and aggressive
behavior, often out of proportion to the situation. Individuals may have
difficulty controlling their anger, leading to verbal or physical aggression
that is not premeditated. These outbursts cause distress and impairment.
Conduct disorder
Conduct disorder is characterized by persistent patterns of behavior that
violate the rights of others or societal norms. These behaviors may
include aggression toward people or animals, destruction of property,
deceitfulness, and serious violations of rules. Conduct disorder can range
from mild to severe and is often a precursor to antisocial personality
disorder in adulthood.
Specify if: With limited prosocial emotions
Specify current severity: Mild, Moderate, and Severe
Specify whether: Childhood-onset type, Adolescent-onset type,
Unspecified onset
Antisocial personality disorder (ASPD)
ASPD is a personality disorder characterized by a pattern of disregard for
the rights of others, impulsivity, deceitfulness, irritability, aggressiveness,
and lack of remorse. Individuals with ASPD may engage in illegal
activities, lie or manipulate others for personal gain, and have difficulty
forming meaningful relationships. This disorder typically emerges in late
childhood or adolescence and continues into adulthood. It is often
216
associated with a history of conduct disorder during childhood.
Pyromania
Pyromania is a rare impulse-control disorder characterized by an urge to
deliberately set fires for pleasure, gratification, or relief. Individuals with
pyromania are often fascinated by fire and may experience a sense of
excitement or relief while setting fires. This behavior is not driven by
financial gain, political ideology, or a desire for revenge.
Kleptomania
319
Kleptomania is another impulse-control disorder characterized by
recurrent acts of stealing objects that are not needed for personal use or
monetary gain. Individuals with kleptomania may experience tension
before committing the theft and a sense of relief or gratification afterward.
The stolen items are typically of little or no value to the individual.
Other specified disruptive, impulse-control, and conduct disorder
This diagnosis is used when an individual’s symptoms do not fully meet
the criteria for any specific disorder within this category but still warrant
clinical attention. This could involve atypical symptom patterns or specific
circumstances.
Unspecified disruptive, impulse-control, and conduct disorder
This diagnosis is used when an individual’s symptoms cause distress or
impairment, but the specific nature of the symptoms or their relationship
to other disorders is not fully understood.
Substance-Related and Addictive Disorders
Substance-related disorders
Substance use disorders (SUDs): These disorders involve problematic
and repeated use of substances such as alcohol, drugs, or
medications. Symptoms include an inability to control use, spending
excessive time seeking or using the substance, neglecting
responsibilities, cravings, and withdrawal symptoms when not using the
substance. Severity ranges from mild to severe, and treatment involves
counseling, therapy, and sometimes medication.
Substance-induced intoxication: This occurs when using a substance
leads to temporary changes in behavior, mood, cognition, or
perception. Intoxication can vary depending on the substance, ranging
from euphoria to confusion, and can sometimes result in dangerous
behaviors or accidents.
Substance-induced withdrawal: This involves physical and
psychological symptoms that occur when a person stops using a
substance that has reached dependency. Symptoms can include
nausea, tremors, anxiety, irritability, and in severe cases, seizures, or
hallucinations.
Substance-induced mental disorders: These are mental health
conditions triggered by substance use. For instance, substance-
320
induced anxiety or substance-induced depressive disorder can
217
emerge as a result of using certain substances. The symptoms of
these disorders usually resolve once the substance use stops.
Substance-induced sleep disorders: Substance use can disrupt sleep
patterns and lead to sleep disorders. This may involve insomnia,
hypersomnia (excessive sleepiness), or other sleep-related problems
triggered by substance consumption.
Alcohol-Related Disorders
Alcohol is a depressant that affects the central nervous system. In small
amounts, it can lead to relaxation and lowered inhibitions. However, in
larger amounts, it can cause impaired judgment, slowed reaction times,
slurred speech, memory impairment, and motor coordination difficulties.
Long-term heavy use can lead to liver damage, cognitive deficits,
addiction, and various physical and mental health problems.
Alcohol use disorder
This is a specific type of substance use disorder related to alcohol
consumption. It involves problematic drinking patterns, such as excessive
consumption, unsuccessful attempts to cut down, and continued use
despite negative consequences.
Specify if: In a controlled environment
Specify current severity/remission: Mild (In early remission, In
sustained remission), Moderate (In early remission, In sustained
remission), Severe (In early remission, In sustained remission)
Alcohol intoxication
With mild use disorder
With moderate or severe use disorder
Without use disorder
Alcohol withdrawal
Without perceptual disturbances
With mild use disorder
With moderate or severe use disorder
Without use disorder
With perceptual disturbances
With mild use disorder
With moderate or severe use disorder
321
Without use disorder
Alcohol-induced mental disorders
Specify: With onset during intoxication, With onset during withdrawal
Specify if: Acute, Persistent
Specify if: Hyperactive, Hypoactive, and Mixed level of activity
Alcohol-induced psychotic disorder
With mild use disorder
With moderate or severe use disorder
Without use disorder
218
Alcohol-induced bipolar and related disorder
With mild use disorder
With moderate or severe use disorder
Without use disorder
Alcohol-induced depressive disorder
With mild use disorder
With moderate or severe use disorder
Without use disorder
Alcohol-induced anxiety disorder
With mild use disorder
With moderate or severe use disorder
Without use disorder
Alcohol-induced sleep disorder
Specify whether Insomnia type
With mild use disorder
With moderate or severe use disorder
Without use disorder
Alcohol-induced sexual dysfunction
Specify if: Mild, Moderate, and Severe
With mild use disorder
With moderate or severe use disorder
Without use disorder
Alcohol intoxication delirium
With mild use disorder
322
With moderate or severe use disorder
Without use disorder
Alcohol withdrawal delirium
With mild use disorder
With moderate or severe use disorder
Without use disorder
Alcohol-induced major neurocognitive disorder
Specify if: Persistent
Amnestic-confabulatory type
With moderate or severe use disorder
Without use disorder
Nonamnestic-confabulatory type
With moderate or severe use disorder
Without use disorder
219
Alcohol-induced mild neurocognitive disorder
Specify if: Persistent
With mild use disorder
With moderate or severe use disorder
Without use disorder
Unspecified alcohol-related disorder
Caffeine-Related Disorders
Caffeine-related disorders refer to a set of conditions that are related to
the consumption of caffeine, a stimulant found in various beverages,
foods, and medications.
Caffeine intoxication
Caffeine withdrawal
Caffeine-induced mental disorders
Specify: With onset during intoxication, With onset during
withdrawal, With onset after medication use
Caffeine-induced anxiety disorder
Caffeine-induced sleep disorder
323
Specify whether: Insomnia type, Daytime sleepiness type, Mixed
type
Unspecified caffeine-related disorder
Cannabis-Related Disorders
Cannabis, often referred to as marijuana, has both depressant and mild
hallucinogenic effects. It can lead to relaxation, altered perception of time,
and euphoria. Common short-term effects include bloodshot eyes,
increased heart rate, dry mouth, and impaired memory and coordination.
Long-term use can lead to cognitive impairment, respiratory issues, and
potential addiction.
Cannabis use disorder
This disorder involves problematic use of marijuana or cannabis products,
leading to impairment or distress. Symptoms include unsuccessful
attempts to quit, increased tolerance, and reduced engagement in
important activities.
Specify if: In a controlled environment
Specify current severity/remission: Mild (In early remission, In
sustained remission), Moderate (In early remission, In sustained
remission), Severe (In early remission, In sustained remission)
Cannabis intoxication
Without perceptual disturbances
With mild use disorder
With moderate or severe use disorder
Without use disorder
With perceptual disturbances
With mild use disorder
With moderate or severe use disorder
Without use disorder
220
Cannabis withdrawal
With mild use disorder
With moderate or severe use disorder
Without use disorder
Cannabis-induced mental disorders
324
Specify: With onset during intoxication, With onset during
withdrawal, With onset after medication use
Specify if: Acute, Persistent
Specify if: Hyperactive, Hypoactive, and Mixed level of activity
Cannabis-induced psychotic disorder
With mild use disorder
With moderate or severe use disorder
Without use disorder
Cannabis-induced anxiety disorder
With mild use disorder
With moderate or severe use disorder
Without use disorder
Cannabis-induced sleep disorder
Specify whether: Insomnia type, Daytime sleepiness type, and Mixed
type
With mild use disorder
With moderate or severe use disorder
Without use disorder
Cannabis intoxication delirium
With mild use disorder
With moderate or severe use disorder
Without use disorder
Pharmaceutical cannabis receptor agonist-induced delirium
Unspecified cannabis-related disorder
Hallucinogen-Related Disorders
Hallucinogens can alter perception, thoughts, and feelings. They can
cause hallucinations, sensory distortions, and profound changes in
consciousness. Short-term effects can vary widely, but long-term
221
effects are less well-defined. However, some users may experience
persistent changes in perception or emotional states.
Phencyclidine use disorder
Specify if: In a controlled environment
325
Specify current severity/remission: Mild (In early remission, In
sustained remission), Moderate (In early remission, In sustained
remission), Severe (In early remission, In sustained remission)
Other hallucinogen use disorder
Specify the particular hallucinogen
Specify if: In a controlled environment
Specify current severity/remission: Mild (In early remission, In
sustained remission), Moderate (In early remission, In sustained
remission), Severe (In early remission, In sustained remission)
Phencyclidine intoxication
With mild use disorder
With moderate or severe use disorder
Without use disorder
Other hallucinogen intoxication
With mild use disorder
With moderate or severe use disorder
Without use disorder
Hallucinogen persisting perception disorder
Phencyclidine-induced mental disorders
Specify: With onset during intoxication, With onset after medication
use
Phencyclidine-induced psychotic disorder
With mild use disorder
With moderate or severe use disorder
Without use disorder
Phencyclidine-induced bipolar and related disorder
With mild use disorder
With moderate or severe use disorder
Without use disorder
Phencyclidine-induced depressive disorder
With mild use disorder
With moderate or severe use disorder
Without use disorder
Phencyclidine-induced anxiety disorder
With mild use disorder
222
326
With moderate or severe use disorder
Without use disorder
Phencyclidine intoxication delirium
Specify if: Acute, Persistent
Specify if: Hyperactive, Hypoactive, and Mixed level of activity
With mild use disorder
With moderate or severe use disorder
Without use disorder
Hallucinogen-induced mental disorders
Specify: With onset during intoxication, With onset after medication
use
Specify if: Acute, Persistent
Specify if: Hyperactive, Hypoactive, and Mixed level of activity
Other hallucinogen-induced psychotic disorder
With mild use disorder
With moderate or severe use disorder
Without use disorder
Other hallucinogen-induced bipolar and related disorder
With mild use disorder
With moderate or severe use disorder
Without use disorder
Other hallucinogen-induced depressive disorder
With mild use disorder
With moderate or severe use disorder
Without use disorder
Other hallucinogen-induced anxiety disorder
With mild use disorder
With moderate or severe use disorder
Without use disorder
Other hallucinogen intoxication delirium
With mild use disorder
With moderate or severe use disorder
Without use disorder
Ketamine or other hallucinogen-induced delirium
Unspecified phencyclidine-related disorder
327
Unspecified hallucinogen-related disorder
Inhalant-Related Disorders
Inhalants are volatile substances that produce chemical vapors that can
be inhaled to induce a psychoactive, or mind-altering, effect. Short-term
effects can include dizziness, confusion, impaired coordination, and
nausea. Long-term use can lead to serious neurological and other health-
related consequences.
Inhalant use disorder
223
Specify the particular inhalant
Specify if: In a controlled environment
Specify current severity/remission: Mild (In early remission, In
sustained remission), Moderate (In early remission, In sustained
remission), Severe (In early remission, In sustained remission)
Inhalant intoxication
With mild use disorder
With moderate or severe use disorder
Without use disorder
Inhalant-induced mental disorders
Specify: With onset during intoxication
Inhalant-induced psychotic disorder
With mild use disorder
With moderate or severe use disorder
Without use disorder
Inhalant-induced depressive disorder
With mild use disorder
With moderate or severe use disorder
Without use disorder
Inhalant-induced anxiety disorder
With mild use disorder
With moderate or severe use disorder
Without use disorder
Inhalant intoxication delirium
328
Specify if: Acute, Persistent
Specify if: Hyperactive, Hypoactive, and Mixed level of activity
With mild use disorder
With moderate or severe use disorder
Without use disorder
Inhalant-induced major neurocognitive disorder
Specify if: Persistent
With mild use disorder
With moderate or severe use disorder
Without use disorder
Inhalant-induced mild neurocognitive disorder
Specify if: Persistent
With mild use disorder
With moderate or severe use disorder
Without use disorder
224
Unspecified inhalant-related disorder
Opioid-Related Disorders
Opioids are central nervous system depressants that induce pain relief,
relaxation, and euphoria. Short-term effects include pain relief,
drowsiness, and constipation. Long-term use can lead to physical
dependence, respiratory depression, increased risk of overdose, and
potential addiction.
Opioid use disorder
Specify if: On maintenance therapy, In a controlled environment
Specify current severity/remission: Mild (In early remission, In
sustained remission), Moderate (In early remission, In sustained
remission), Severe (In early remission, In sustained remission)
Opioid intoxication
Without perceptual disturbances
With mild use disorder
With moderate or severe use disorder
Without use disorder
With perceptual disturbances
With mild use disorder
329
With moderate or severe use disorder
Without use disorder
Opioid withdrawal
With mild use disorder
With moderate or severe use disorder
Without use disorder
Opioid-induced mental disorders
Specify: With onset during intoxication, With onset during
withdrawal, With onset after medication use.
Specify if: Acute, Persistent
Specify if: Hyperactive, Hypoactive, and Mixed level of activity
Opioid-induced depressive disorder
With mild use disorder
With moderate or severe use disorder
Without use disorder
Opioid-induced anxiety disorder
With mild use disorder
With moderate or severe use disorder
Without use disorder
225
Opioid-induced sleep disorder
Specify whether: Insomnia type, Daytime sleepiness type, and
Mixed type
With mild use disorder
With moderate or severe use disorder
Without use disorder
Opioid-induced sexual dysfunction
Specify if: Mild, Moderate, and Severe
With mild use disorder
With moderate or severe use disorder
Without use disorder
Opioid intoxication delirium
With mild use disorder
With moderate or severe use disorder
Without use disorder
Opioid withdrawal delirium
330
With mild use disorder
With moderate or severe use disorder
Without use disorder
Opioid-induced delirium
When opioid medication taken as prescribed
During withdrawal from opioid medication taken as prescribed
Unspecified opioid-related disorder
Sedative-, Hypnotic-, or Anxiolytic-Related Disorders
These substances are commonly prescribed medications that are used to
manage anxiety, promote sleep, or induce relaxation. However, when
used inappropriately or excessively, they can lead to negative
consequences and potential addiction.
Sedatives: These are substances that have a calming effect and can
help reduce anxiety and induce relaxation. They may also be referred
to as “tranquilizers.” Common sedatives include benzodiazepines like
diazepam (Valium) and lorazepam (Ativan).
226
Hypnotics: Hypnotics are substances that promote sleep. They are
often prescribed for individuals with insomnia or sleep disorders.
Common hypnotics include medications like zolpidem (Ambien) and
eszopiclone (Lunesta).
Anxiolytics: Anxiolytics are substances used to manage anxiety. They
help alleviate feelings of anxiety and tension. Benzodiazepines and
certain other medications can also fall under this category
Sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic use disorder
Specify if: In a controlled environment
Specify current severity/remission: Mild (In early remission, In
sustained remission), Moderate (In early remission, In sustained
remission), Severe (In early remission, In sustained remission)
Sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic intoxication
With mild use disorder
With moderate or severe use disorder
Without use disorder
Sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic withdrawal
331
Without perceptual disturbances
With mild use disorder
With moderate or severe use disorder
Without use disorder
With perceptual disturbances
With mild use disorder
With moderate or severe use disorder
Without use disorder
Sedative-, hypnotic-, or anxiolytic-induced mental disorders
Specify: With onset during intoxication, With onset during
withdrawal, With onset after medication use.
Specify if: Acute, Persistent
Specify if: Hyperactive, Hypoactive, and Mixed level of activity
Sedative-, hypnotic-, or anxiolytic-induced psychotic disorder
With mild use disorder
With moderate or severe use disorder
Without use disorder
Sedative-, hypnotic-, or anxiolytic-induced bipolar and related
disorder
With mild use disorder
With moderate or severe use disorder
Without use disorder
Sedative-, hypnotic-, or anxiolytic-induced depressive
227
disorder
With mild use disorder
With moderate or severe use disorder
Without use disorder
Sedative-, hypnotic-, or anxiolytic-induced anxiety disorder
With mild use disorder
With moderate or severe use disorder
Without use disorder
Sedative-, hypnotic-, or anxiolytic-induced sleep disorder
Specify whether: Insomnia type, Daytime sleepiness type,
Parasomnia type, and Mixed type
With mild use disorder
With moderate or severe use disorder
332
Without use disorder
Sedative-, hypnotic-, or anxiolytic-induced sexual dysfunction
Specify if: Mild, Moderate, and Severe
With mild use disorder
With moderate or severe use disorder
Without use disorder
Sedative-, hypnotic-, or anxiolytic intoxication delirium
With mild use disorder
With moderate or severe use disorder
Without use disorder
Sedative-, hypnotic-, or anxiolytic withdrawal delirium
With mild use disorder
With moderate or severe use disorder
Without use disorder
Sedative-, hypnotic-, or anxiolytic-induced delirium
When sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic medication taken as
prescribed
During withdrawal from sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic
medication taken as prescribed
Sedative-, hypnotic-, or anxiolytic-induced major neurocognitive
disorder
Specify if: Persistent
With moderate or severe use disorder
Without use disorder
Sedative-, hypnotic-, or anxiolytic-induced mild
neurocognitive disorder
Specify if: Persistent
With mild use disorder
With moderate or severe use disorder
Without use disorder
228
Unspecified sedative-, hypnotic-, or anxiolytic-related disorder
Stimulant-Related Disorders
Stimulants increase alertness, energy, and focus. They can cause
heightened heart rate, increased blood pressure, and intense euphoria.
333
Short-term effects include increased energy and reduced appetite. Long-
term use can lead to cardiovascular issues, anxiety, paranoia, and
addiction.
Stimulant use disorder
Specify if: In a controlled environment
Specify current severity/remission: Mild (amphetamine-type
substance, cocaine, other or unspecified stimulant), Mild in early
remission (amphetamine-type substance, cocaine, other or
unspecified stimulant), Mild in sustained remission (amphetamine-
type substance, cocaine, other or unspecified stimulant), Moderate
(amphetamine-type substance, cocaine, other or unspecified
stimulant), Moderate in early remission (amphetamine-type
substance, cocaine, other or unspecified stimulant), Moderate in
sustained remission (amphetamine-type substance, cocaine, other
or unspecified stimulant), Severe (amphetamine-type substance,
cocaine, other or unspecified stimulant), Severe in early remission
(amphetamine-type substance, cocaine, other or unspecified
stimulant), Severe in sustained remission (amphetamine-type
substance, cocaine, other or unspecified stimulant)
Stimulant intoxication
Specify the particular intoxicant
Without perceptual disturbances
Amphetamine-type substance or other stimulant intoxication
With mild use disorder
With moderate or severe use disorder
Without use disorder
Cocaine intoxication
With mild use disorder
With moderate or severe use disorder
Without use disorder
With perceptual disturbances
Amphetamine-type substance or other stimulant intoxication
With mild use disorder
With moderate or severe use disorder
Without use disorder
Cocaine intoxication
With mild use disorder
334
With moderate or severe use disorder
Without use disorder
229
Stimulant withdrawal
Specify the particular substance that causes the withdrawal
syndrome
Amphetamine-type substance or other stimulant withdrawal
With mild use disorder
With moderate or severe use disorder
Without use disorder
Cocaine withdrawal
With mild use disorder
With moderate or severe use disorder
Without use disorder
Stimulant-induced mental disorders
Specify: With onset during intoxication, With onset during
withdrawal, With onset after medication use
Specify if: Acute, Persistent
Specify if: Hyperactive, Hypoactive, and Mixed level of activity
Amphetamine-type substance (or other stimulant)-induced psychotic
disorder
With mild use disorder
With moderate or severe use disorder
Without use disorder
Cocaine-induced psychotic disorder
With mild use disorder
With moderate or severe use disorder
Without use disorder
Amphetamine-type substance (or other stimulant)-induced bipolar
and related disorder
With mild use disorder
With moderate or severe use disorder
Without use disorder
Cocaine-induced bipolar and related disorder
With mild use disorder
335
With moderate or severe use disorder
Without use disorder
Amphetamine-type substance (or other stimulant)-induced
depressive disorder
With mild use disorder
With moderate or severe use disorder
Without use disorder
Cocaine-induced depressive disorder
With mild use disorder
With moderate or severe use disorder
Without use disorder
Amphetamine-type substance (or other stimulant)-induced
anxiety disorder
With mild use disorder
With moderate or severe use disorder
Without use disorder
230
Cocaine-induced anxiety disorder
With mild use disorder
With moderate or severe use disorder
Without use disorder
Amphetamine-type substance (or other stimulant)-induced
obsessive-compulsive and related disorder
With mild use disorder
With moderate or severe use disorder
Without use disorder
Cocaine-induced obsessive-compulsive and related disorder
With mild use disorder
With moderate or severe use disorder
Without use disorder
Amphetamine-type substance (or other stimulant)-induced sleep
disorder
Mixed type
Specify whether: Insomnia type, Daytime sleepiness type, and
With mild use disorder
336
With moderate or severe use disorder
Without use disorder
Cocaine-induced sleep disorder
Specify whether: Insomnia type, Daytime sleepiness type, and
Mixed type
With mild use disorder
With moderate or severe use disorder
Without use disorder
Amphetamine-type substance (or other stimulant-induced sexual
dysfunction
Specify if: Mild, Moderate, and Severe
With mild use disorder
With moderate or severe use disorder
Without use disorder
Cocaine-induced sexual dysfunction
Specify if: Mild, Moderate, and Severe
With mild use disorder
With moderate or severe use disorder
Without use disorder
Amphetamine-type substance (or other stimulant) intoxication
delirium
With mild use disorder
With moderate or severe use disorder
Without use disorder
Cocaine intoxication delirium
With mild use disorder
With moderate or severe use disorder
Without use disorder
231
Amphetamine-type (or other stimulant) medication-induced delirium
Amphetamine-type substance (or other stimulant)-induced mild
neurocognitive disorder
Specify if: Persistent
With mild use disorder
With moderate or severe use disorder
337
Without use disorder
Cocaine-induced mild neurocognitive disorder
Specify if: Persistent
With mild use disorder
With moderate or severe use disorder
Without use disorder
Unspecified stimulant-related disorder
Amphetamine-type substance or other stimulant
Cocaine
Tobacco-Related Disorders
Tobacco products, which contain nicotine, are stimulants. Nicotine causes
a quick release of adrenaline, leading to increased heart rate, increased
blood pressure, and a sense of alertness. Regular use can lead to
addiction and long-term health issues, including respiratory problems and
various forms of cancer.
Tobacco use disorder
Specify if: On maintenance therapy, In a controlled environment
Specify current severity/remission: Mild, Moderate (In early
remission, In sustained remission), and Severe (In early remission,
In sustained remission)
Tobacco withdrawal
Tobacco-induced mental disorders
Tobacco-induced sleep disorder, With moderate or severe use
disorder
Specify whether: Insomnia type, Daytime sleepiness type, and Mixed
type
Specify: With onset during withdrawal, With onset after medication
use
Unspecified tobacco-related disorder
Other (or Unknown) Substance–Related Disorders
Other (or unknown) substance use disorder
338
Specify if: In a controlled environment
Specify current severity/remission: Mild (In early remission, In
sustained remission), Moderate (In early remission, In sustained
remission), and Severe (In early remission, In sustained remission)
Other (or unknown) substance intoxication
Without perceptual disturbances
With mild use disorder
With moderate or severe use disorder
Without use disorder
232
With perceptual disturbances
With mild use disorder
With moderate or severe use disorder
Without use disorder
Other (or unknown) substance withdrawal
Without perceptual disturbances
With mild use disorder
With moderate or severe use disorder
Without use disorder
With perceptual disturbances
With mild use disorder
With moderate or severe use disorder
Without use disorder
Other (or unknown) substance-induced mental disorders
Specify: With onset during intoxication, With onset during
withdrawal, With onset after medication use
Specify if: Acute, Persistent
Specify if: Hyperactive, Hypoactive, and Mixed level of activity
Other (or unknown) substance-induced psychotic disorder
With mild use disorder
With moderate or severe use disorder
Without use disorder
Other (or unknown) substance-induced bipolar and related disorder
With mild use disorder
With moderate or severe use disorder
339
Without use disorder
Other (or unknown) substance-induced depressive disorder
With mild use disorder
With moderate or severe use disorder
Without use disorder
Other (or unknown) substance-induced anxiety disorder
With mild use disorder
With moderate or severe use disorder
Without use disorder
Other (or unknown) substance-induced obsessive-compulsive and
related disorder
With mild use disorder
With moderate or severe use disorder
Without use disorder
Other (or unknown) substance-induced sleep disorder
Specify whether: Insomnia type, Daytime sleepiness type,
Parasomnia type, and Mixed type
With mild use disorder
233
With moderate or severe use disorder
Without use disorder
Other (or unknown) substance-induced sexual dysfunction
Specify if: Mild, Moderate, and Severe
With mild use disorder
With moderate or severe use disorder
Without use disorder
Other (or unknown) substance intoxication delirium
With mild use disorder
With moderate or severe use disorder
Without use disorder
Other (or unknown) substance withdrawal delirium
With mild use disorder
With moderate or severe use disorder
Without use disorder
340
Other (or unknown) medication-induced delirium
When other (or unknown) medication taken as prescribed
During withdrawal from other (or unknown) medication taken as
prescribed
Other (or unknown) substance-induced major neurocognitive
disorder
Specify if: Persistent
With mild use disorder
With moderate or severe use disorder
Without use disorder
Other (or unknown) substance-induced mild neurocognitive disorder
Specify if: Persistent
With mild use disorder
With moderate or severe use disorder
Without use disorder
Unspecified other (or unknown) substance–related disorder
Non-Substance-Related Disorders
Gambling disorder
Specify if: Episodic, Persistent
Specify if: In early remission, In sustained remission
Specify current severity: Mild, Moderate, and Severe
Neurocognitive Disorders
234
Neurocognitive disorders refer to a group of conditions characterized by a
significant decline in cognitive functioning (thinking abilities, memory,
reasoning, perception, and more) that goes beyond what might be
expected due to normal aging. These disorders reflect impairments that
impact a person’s ability to perform everyday activities independently.
Delirium
Specify if: Acute, Persistent
Specify if: Hyperactive, Hypoactive, and Mixed level of activity
Specify whether: Substance intoxication delirium; Substance
withdrawal delirium; Medication-induced delirium
341
Delirium due to another medical condition
Delirium due to multiple etiologies
Other specified delirium
Unspecified delirium
Major and Mild Neurocognitive Disorders
Specify whether due to (any of the following medical etiologies):
Alzheimer’s disease, frontotemporal degeneration, lewy body
disease, vascular disease, traumatic brain injury,
substance/medication use, HIV infection, prion disease, Parkinson’s
disease, Huntington’s disease, another medical condition, multiple
etiologies, unspecified etiology
Specify current severity: Mild, Moderate, and Severe. This specifier
applies only to major neurocognitive disorders (including probable
and possible).
Specify: Without behavioral disturbance, With behavioral
disturbance. For all mild neurocognitive disorders,
substance/medication-induced major neurocognitive disorder, and
unspecified neurocognitive disorder, behavioral disturbance cannot
be coded but should still be recorded.
Major or mild neurocognitive disorder due to Alzheimer’s disease
Major neurocognitive disorder due to probable Alzheimer’s disease
With behavioral disturbance
Without behavioral disturbance
Major neurocognitive disorder due to possible Alzheimer’s disease
With behavioral disturbance
Without behavioral disturbance
Mild neurocognitive disorder due to Alzheimer’s disease
Major or mild frontotemporal neurocognitive disorder
Major neurocognitive disorder due to probable frontotemporal
degeneration
With behavioral disturbance
Without behavioral disturbance
235
Major neurocognitive disorder due to possible frontotemporal
degeneration
342
With behavioral disturbance
Without behavioral disturbance
Mild neurocognitive disorder due to frontotemporal degeneration
Major or mild neurocognitive disorder with Lewy bodies
Major neurocognitive disorder with probable Lewy bodies
With behavioral disturbance
Without behavioral disturbance
Major neurocognitive disorder with possible Lewy bodies
With behavioral disturbance
Without behavioral disturbance
Mild neurocognitive disorder with Lewy bodies
Major or mild vascular neurocognitive disorder
Major neurocognitive disorder probably due to vascular disease
With behavioral disturbance
Without behavioral disturbance
Major neurocognitive disorder possibly due to vascular disease
With behavioral disturbance
Without behavioral disturbance
Mild neurocognitive disorder due to vascular disease
Major or mild neurocognitive disorder due to traumatic brain injury
Major neurocognitive disorder due to traumatic brain injury
With behavioral disturbance
Without behavioral disturbance
Mild neurocognitive disorder due to traumatic brain injury
Substance/medication-induced major or mild neurocognitive disorder
Specify if: Persistent
Substance/medication-induced major neurocognitive disorder
Substance/medication-induced mild neurocognitive disorder
Major or mild neurocognitive disorder due to HIV infection
Major neurocognitive disorder due to HIV infection
With behavioral disturbance
Without behavioral disturbance
Mild neurocognitive disorder due to HIV infection
Major or mild neurocognitive disorder due to prion disease
343
Major neurocognitive disorder due to prion disease
With behavioral disturbance
Without behavioral disturbance
Mild neurocognitive disorder due to prion disease
236
Major or mild neurocognitive disorder due to Parkinson’s disease
Major neurocognitive disorder probably due to Parkinson’s disease
With behavioral disturbance
Without behavioral disturbance
Major neurocognitive disorder possibly due to Parkinson’s disease
With behavioral disturbance
Without behavioral disturbance
Mild neurocognitive disorder due to Parkinson’s disease
Major or mild neurocognitive disorder due to Huntington’s disease
Major neurocognitive disorder due to Huntington’s disease
With behavioral disturbance
Without behavioral disturbance
Mild neurocognitive disorder due to Huntington’s disease
Major or mild neurocognitive disorder due to another medical condition
Major neurocognitive disorder due to another medical condition
With behavioral disturbance
Without behavioral disturbance
Mild neurocognitive disorder due to another medical condition
Major or mild neurocognitive disorder due to multiple etiologies
Major neurocognitive disorder due to multiple etiologies
With behavioral disturbance
Without behavioral disturbance
Mild neurocognitive disorder due to multiple etiologies
Unspecified neurocognitive disorder
Personality Disorders
Each personality disorder involves a distinct pattern of thinking, feeling,
and behaving that differs from societal norms and causes significant
impairment in daily life.
Cluster A Personality Disorders
344
Paranoid personality disorder—a pattern of distrust and suspicion of
others, interpreting their motives as malevolent, without justification
Schizoid personality disorder—detachment from social relationships,
limited emotional expression, and preference for solitary activities
237
Schizotypal personality disorder—eccentric behavior, odd beliefs or
magical thinking, and discomfort with close relationships, along with
perceptual distortions
Cluster B Personality Disorders
Antisocial personality disorder—disregard for others’ rights, lack of
empathy, manipulative behavior, impulsivity, and a history of conduct
problems
Borderline personality disorder—instability in relationships, self-image,
and emotions, marked by impulsivity, self-destructive behavior, and
intense fear of abandonment
Histrionic personality disorder—attention-seeking behavior, strong
emotions, and exaggerated expressions, often seeking reassurance and
approval
Narcissistic personality disorder—grandiosity, a need for admiration, lack
of empathy, and a sense of entitlement
Cluster C Personality Disorders
Avoidant personality disorder—extreme social inhibition, feelings of
inadequacy, and hypersensitivity to negative evaluation, leading to
avoidance of social interactions
Dependent personality disorder—excessive need to be cared for,
submissive behavior, fear of separation, and difficulty making decisions
independently
Obsessive-compulsive personality disorder—preoccupation with
orderliness, perfectionism, and control, often at the expense of flexibility
and interpersonal relationships
Other Personality Disorders
Personality change due to another medical condition
Specify whether: Labile type, Disinhibited type, Aggressive type,
Apathetic type, Paranoid type, Other type, Combined type,
345
Unspecified type
Other specified personality disorder—traits of one or more personality
disorders that do not align with any specific category but cause significant
distress or impairment
Unspecified personality disorder—when personality traits cause distress
or impairment but do not fit the criteria for any specific personality
disorder
Paraphilic Disorders
Paraphilic disorders refer to a group of mental health conditions
characterized by atypical sexual interests or behaviors that are outside
the cultural norm and may cause distress, impairment, or harm to oneself
or others. These disorders involve recurrent and intense sexual fantasies,
urges, or behaviors that center around non-human objects, non-
consenting individuals, suffering or humiliation, or other unconventional
preferences. Not all unconventional sexual interests are considered
disorders; only those that lead to distress, impairment, or harm are
diagnosed as paraphilic disorders.
The following specifier applies to paraphilic disorders where
indicated:
Specify if: In a controlled environment, In full remission
Voyeuristic disorder
Arousal is derived from secretly observing others undressing or
engaging in sexual activities without their knowledge or consent.
238
Exhibitionistic disorder
Arousal is achieved through exposing one’s genitals to others without
their consent, often seeking reactions or shock.
Specify whether: Sexually aroused by exposing genitals to
prepubertal children, Sexually aroused by exposing genitals to
physically mature individuals, Sexually aroused by exposing genitals
to prepubertal children and to physically mature individuals
Frotteuristic disorder
Arousal is obtained from touching or rubbing against non-consenting
individuals in crowded situations.
Sexual masochism disorder
346
Arousal is linked to experiencing pain, humiliation, or suffering during
sexual activities.
Specify if: With asphyxiophilia
Sexual sadism disorder
Arousal is derived from inflicting pain, humiliation, or suffering on others
during sexual activities.
Pedophilic disorder
Sexual attraction is directed toward prepubescent children.
Specify whether: Exclusive type, Nonexclusive type
Specify if: Sexually attracted to males, Sexually attracted to females,
Sexually attracted to both
Specify if: Limited to incest
Fetishistic disorder
Arousal is achieved from non-human objects or specific body parts that
are not typically sexual.
Specify: Body part(s), Nonliving object(s), Other
Transvestic disorder
Arousal is gained from cross-dressing, mainly in males, which causes
distress or impairment.
Specify if: With fetishism, With autogynephilia
Other specified paraphilic disorder
Atypical sexual interests cause distress but don’t fit established
categories.
Unspecified paraphilic disorder
Distressful sexual interests don’t meet criteria for specific paraphilic
disorders.
Medication-Induced Movement Disorders and Other
239
Adverse Effects of Medication
These are involuntary and abnormal movements, like tardive dyskinesia
or akathisia, triggered by certain medications, often antipsychotics.
Medication-induced parkinsonism
347
Antipsychotic medication—and other dopamine receptor blocking
agent-induced parkinsonism
Other medication-induced parkinsonism
Neuroleptic malignant syndrome
Medication-induced acute dystonia
Medication-induced acute akathisia
Tardive dyskinesia
Tardive dystonia
Tardive akathisia
Medication-induced postural tremor
Other medication-induced movement disorder
Antidepressant discontinuation syndrome
Initial encounter
Subsequent encounter
Sequelae
Other adverse effect of medication
Initial encounter
Subsequent encounter
Sequelae
THE INDICATORS OF MENTAL AND EMOTIONAL ILLNESS
THROUGHOUT THE LIFESPAN
Psychopathology refers to either the study of mental illness or the
manifestation of behaviors that may be indicative of mental illness or
psychological impairment.
In the 16th and 17th centuries, bizarre behavior associated with mental
illness was believed to be acts of evil spirits, demons, or the devil. To
remedy this, many individuals suffering from mental illness were tortured
in an attempt to drive out demons. When the torturous methods failed to
348
return individuals to sanity, they were typically deemed eternally
possessed and were executed.
By the 18th century, mental illness was viewed differently. It was during
this time period that “madness” began to be seen as an illness beyond
the control of an individual rather than the act of a demon. Because of
this, thousands of people were confined to asylums where medical forms
of treatment began to be investigated.
Today, the medical model is a driving force in the diagnosing and
240
treatment of psychopathology.
There is a general consensus that psychopathology is influenced by the
milieus in which clients are socialized and the cultural experiences to
which they have been exposed. The magnitude of cultural influences on
psychopathology is not fully known. Certainly definitions of aberrant
behavior vary between cultural groups.
Many different professions, including social work, are involved in studying
and/or treating mental illness or psychopathology.
Although the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders
(DSM) provides a framework and criteria for applying uniform labels to
psychiatric dysfunction, the process of social work assessment and
diagnosis is much broader.
Diagnosis refers to the process of identifying problems, with their
underlying causes and practical solutions.
A diagnosis is generally obtained after a social worker utilizes information
gained through the assessment. Diagnosing includes drawing inferences
and reaching conclusions based on the data available. A social worker
should not diagnose if adequate information or data is not available.
A social worker must consider biological, psychological, and social factors
when identifying the root causes of client problems.
Diagnostic information should always be shared with clients and used to
facilitate the establishment of intervention plans.
Assessment and diagnosis must be a continual part of the problem-
solving process.
The assessment process must focus on client strengths and resources
for addressing problems.
There are some terms and concepts that a social worker should be
familiar with when making assessments and/or diagnosing.
1. Comorbid: existing with or at the same time; for instance, having tw
349
different illnesses at the same time
2. Contraindicated: not recommended or safe to use (a medication
treatment that is contraindicated would not be prescribed because
could have serious consequences)
3. Delusion: false, fixed belief despite evidence to the contrary (believin
something that is not true)
4. Disorientation: confusion with regard to person, time, or place
5. Dissociation: disturbance or change in the usually integrative functio
of memory, identity, perception, or consciousness (often seen
clients with a history of trauma)
6. Endogenous depression: depression caused by a biochemic
imbalance rather than a psychosocial stressor or external factors
7. Exogenous depression: depression caused by external events
psychosocial stressors
8. Folie à deux: shared delusion
9. Hallucinations: hearing, seeing, smelling, or feeling something that
not real (auditory most common)
Hypomanic: elevated, expansive, or
10. 241
irritable mood that is less severe
than full-blown manic symptoms (not severe enough to interfere
with functioning and not accompanied by psychotic symptoms)
11. Postmorbid: subsequent to the onset of an illness
12. Premorbid: prior to the onset of an illness
13. Psychotic: experiencing delusions or hallucinations
BIOPSYCHOSOCIAL FACTORS RELATED TO MENTAL
HEALTH
When a client has a mental health problem or illness, it impacts on all
aspects of life, including health, psychological functioning, and
socialization. In addition, there are biological, psychological, and social
risk factors related to mental health and illness.
350
It is not possible to understand mental health and the onset or course of
mental disorders without knowing about biological, psychological, and
social factors and how they interact across the lifespan.
Biological Factors
There is clear evidence to support the role that genes play as a factor in
the development of psychiatric disorders. New information also keeps
emerging about how brain structure and functioning relate to the
existence of mental disorders. It is thought that brain growth in utero or
early life can be affected by exposure to adverse factors, leading to
changes in brain structure that increase the risk of development of
particular mental disorders.
For example, some mental illnesses have been linked to biological
factors, such as abnormal brain functioning, and medication/procedures
can assist in improving the brain to operate more efficiently. Injury and/or
abnormal development to certain areas of the brain have also been linked
to some mental conditions.
Mental illnesses can also be present in families, suggesting that those
who have family members with them may be somewhat more susceptible
to their development. Such susceptibility does not mean that mental
illnesses will occur, only that there is a greater likelihood. Lastly, certain
infections have been linked to brain damage and the development of
mental illness or the worsening of its symptoms. Poor nutrition and
exposure to toxins may also exacerbate symptoms and/or be related to
the development of mental health problems.
Psychological Factors
Personality, relating to others and reacting to the world, include a wide
range of psychological responses to cope with different situations.
Psychoanalytic, cognitive, and behavioral theories have all had an
influence on how personality is understood, its impact on mental
disorders and how it can be influenced in treatment.
Psychological trauma suffered as a child, such as emotional, physical, or
sexual abuse; loss of a caregiver; neglect; or poor ability to relate to
others, also adversely impacts mental health and can place individuals at
risk, especially those with a biological predisposition.
Social Factors
242
351
Social factors can influence mental health in dramatic ways and it is
necessary to investigate social factors thoroughly to fully understand
mental health and disorder. Factors such as socioeconomic situation,
age, gender, social networks, level of support, life events, migration and
culture can all play a role in influencing the onset and course of mental
illnesses.
Certain social stressors can also trigger mental health problems or the
development of mental illness in those who are susceptible to it. These
stressors include death, divorce, dysfunctional family life, feelings of
inadequacy, low self-esteem, anxiety, anger, loneliness, change in life
circumstance, social or cultural expectations, and/or substance
use/abuse.
A social worker must use a systems approach in assessment of client
mental health. A change in one aspect of a client’s life—such as loss of a
job, diagnosis of a physical illness, and so on—can affect the client’s
mental health. Conversely, mental health problems can have a dramatic
impact on earnings, role fulfillment, friendships and social relationships,
and even physical health.
BIOPSYCHOSOCIAL RESPONSES TO ILLNESS AND
DISABILITY
The ways in which clients experience chronic illness or disability are
influenced by numerous factors including:
■ Personal characteristics (such as gender, race, age, coping style,
experience)
■ Social and family supports
■ Socioeconomic status
■ Culture
■ Environment (physical, social, and political)
■ Activities (restrictions on those related to daily living, work, sc
social)
■ Personal goals
352
The responses to illness or disability are dependent on the interplay
between these factors. Limitations faced may not be due to the illness or
disability, but instead the environment. In addition, societal attitudes may
influence their responses with norms focused more on the limitations than
on actual functioning.
Clients also vary in terms of their personal resources such as tolerance of
symptoms, functional capabilities, coping strategies, and social supports.
Consequently, social workers must assess biopsychosocial responses
individually. The health condition or disability is only one factor that
determines clients’ abilities to function effectively.
COMMON PSYCHOTROPIC AND NON-PSYCHOTROPIC
PRESCRIPTIONS AND OVER-THE-COUNTER MEDICATIONS
AND THEIR SIDE EFFECTS
Psychotropic medications affect brain chemicals associated with mood
and behavior. Psychotropic drugs are prescribed to treat a variety of
mental health problems and typically work by changing the amounts
243
of important chemicals in the brain called “neurotransmitters.”
Psychotropic drugs are usually prescribed by psychiatrists, though other
physicians and professionals may be allowed to prescribe them in certain
jurisdictions. Psychotropic drugs may be needed to treat disorders such
as schizophrenia or bipolar disorder, but are often combined with other
supports, such as that from family and friends, therapy, lifestyle changes,
and other treatment protocols, to ensure healthy everyday living.
Antipsychotics
Used for the treatment of schizophrenia and mania
Typical
Haldol (haloperidol)
Haldol Decanoate (long-acting injectable)
Loxitane (loxapine)
Mellaril (thioridazine)
353
Moban (molindone)
Navane (thiothixene)
Prolixin (fluphenazine)
Serentil (mesoridazine)
Stelazine (trifluoperazine)
Thorazine (chlorpromazine)
Trilafon (perphenazine)
Atypical
Abilify (aripiprazole)
Clozaril (clozapine)
Geodon (ziprasidone)
Risperdal (risperidone)
Seroquel (quetiapine)
Zyprexa (olanzapine)
With Clozaril, there is an increased risk of agranulocytosis that
244
requires blood monitoring.
Some antipsychotics are available in injectable forms; these are
useful for clients who are noncompliant with oral medications.
Tardive dyskinesia (abnormal, involuntary movements of the tongue,
lips, jaw, and face, as well as twitching and snakelike movement of the
extremities and occasionally the trunk) may result from taking high doses
of antipsychotic medications over a long period of time. Symptoms may
persist indefinitely after discontinuation of these medications. Thus,
antipsychotic use should be closely monitored and prescribed at low
doses if possible.
Antimanic Agents (Mood Stabilizers)
354
Used for the treatment of bipolar disorder
Depakene (valproic acid, divalproex sodium), Depakote sprinkles
Lamictal (lamotrigine)
Lithium (lithium carbonate), Eskalith, Lithobid
Tegretol (carbamazepine), Carbatrol
Topamax (topiramate)
There is a small difference between toxic and therapeutic levels
(narrow therapeutic index) that necessitates periodic checks of blood
levels of lithium. Also, there is a need for periodic checks of thyroid and
kidney functions, because lithium can affect the functioning of these
organs.
Antidepressants
Used for the treatment of depressive disorders
Selective Serotonin Reuptake Inhibitors (SSRIs)
Celexa (citalopram)
Lexapro (escitalopram)
Luvox (fluvoxamine)
Paxil (paroxetine)
Prozac (fluoxetine)
Zoloft (sertraline)
Tricyclics
Anafranil (clomipramine)
Asendin (amoxapine)
245
355
Elavil (amitriptyline)
Norpramin (desipramine)
Pamelor (nortriptyline)
Sinequan (doxepin)
Surmontil (trimipramine)
Tofranil (imipramine)
Vivactil (protriptyline)
Monoamine Oxidase Inhibitors (MAOIs)
Nardil (phenelzine)
Parnate (tranylcypromine)
There are dietary restrictions of foods that contain high levels of
tyramine (generally food that has been aged). Foods to avoid may include
beer, ale, wine (particularly Chianti), cheese (except cottage and cream
cheese), smoked or pickled fish (herring), beef or chicken liver, summer
(dry) sausage, fava or broad bean pods (Italian green beans), and yeast
vitamin supplements (brewer’s yeast).
Others
Desyrel (trazodone)
Effexor (venlafaxine)
Remeron (mirtazapine)
Serzone (nefazodone)
Wellbutrin (bupropion)
Antianxiety Drugs
Used for the treatment of anxiety disorders
356
Ativan (lorazepam)
Buspar (buspirone)
Klonopin (clonazepam)
Valium (diazepam)
Xanax (alprazolam)
Benzodiazepines are a class of drugs primarily used for treating
anxiety, but they also are effective in treating several other conditions.
There is a high abuse potential of these drugs and they can be
dangerous when combined with alcohol or illicit substances. It is critical to
look for signs of impaired motor or other functioning.
Stimulants
246
Used for the treatment of attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder
Adderall (amphetamine, mixed salts)
Concerta (methylphenidate, long acting)
Dexedrine (dextroamphetamine)
Dexedrine Spansules (dextroamphetamine, long acting)
Metadate (methylphenidate, long acting)
Ritalin (methylphenidate)
Common Prescription Medications
Many people take at least one prescription medication, with more than
half taking two or more. The most commonly prescribed include the
following medications.
Advair Diskus is a prescription used to treat asthma and chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).
Crestor is a lipid-lowering agent taken orally.
357
Cymbalta is a selective serotonin and norepinephrine reuptake
inhibitor (SSNRI) for oral administration used to treat depression, anxiety,
and pain caused by nerve damage.
Diovan is used to treat heart disease or heart failure.
Hydrocodone/acetaminophen is the most popular painkiller used to
treat moderate to severe pain. Hydrocodone, a narcotic analgesic,
relieves pain through the central nervous system, and it also is used to
stop or prevent coughing. This drug can become habit-forming when
used over an extended period of time.
Levothyroxine sodium is used to treat hypothyroidism, a condition
where the thyroid gland does not produce enough of the thyroid hormone.
This drug also is used to treat thyroid cancer and to help shrink an
enlarged thyroid gland.
Lantus is a sterile solution of insulin glargine for use as a
subcutaneous injection for diabetes.
Lisinopril (which used to be sold under the brand names Zestril and
Prinivil) is a high blood pressure medication. Its main function is to block
chemicals in the body that trigger the tightening of blood vessels.
Lisinopril also is used to help treat heart failure.
Lyrica is used to control seizures, as well as treat nerve pain and
fibromyalgia.
Metoprolol, the generic version of Lopressor, is used to treat high
blood pressure and also helps reduce the risk of repeated heart attacks.
Metoprolol also treats heart failure and heart pain or angina.
Nexium is used to treat symptoms of gastroesophageal reflux disease
(GERD) and other conditions involving excessive stomach acid.
Simvastatin (generic form of Zocor) is prescribed to treat high
cholesterol and is typically recommended in conjunction with diet
changes. This drug is believed to have a variety of benefits including
helping to prevent heart attacks and strokes.
Synthroid is a prescription, man-made thyroid hormone that is used to
treat hypothyroidism.
Ventolin solution is used in inhalers for asthma.
Vyvanse is used to treat hyperactivity and impulse control disorders.
THE INDICATORS OF SOMATIZATION
247
Somatization is the unconscious process by which psychological distress
is expressed as physical symptoms. Somatic symptoms often occur as
358
reactions to stressful situations and are not considered abnormal if they
occur sporadically. However, some clients experience continuing somatic
symptoms and even seek medical care for them.
Persistent somatization is associated with considerable distress and
disability. Somatization may lead to overutilization of medical care,
including unnecessary medical tests, and even increased hospitalization
rates.
Not all somatizing clients are motivated by an unconscious wish to
adopt the sick role, as is observed in clients with factitious disorder.
Clients may vary in their degree of conviction that their symptoms are
caused by a physical illness or disease. Clients may also present in
multiple ways, including having multiple unexplained somatic symptoms,
exhibiting predominantly illness worry or hypochondriacal beliefs, and/or
displaying somatization as a manifestation of a variety of mental
disorders.
THE INDICATORS OF FEIGNING ILLNESS
Malingering is not considered a mental illness. Malingering is a condition
that requires clinical attention. The DSM defines malingering as
intentionally falsely or grossly exaggerating physical or psychological
problems. Motivation for malingering is usually external, such as avoiding
work/military, obtaining reward (financial resources, medications, etc.),
avoiding legal action, and so on. On the other hand, malingering also may
be an adaptive response such as an inmate with mental illness trying to
obtain relatively sparse and difficult-to-obtain mental health resources in
prison.
Malingering varies in intensity, from all symptoms being falsified to
some symptoms being falsified or symptoms being exaggerated.
Malingering is not easy to diagnose because of the difficulty in gathering
external evidence.
Prolonged direct observation can reveal evidence of malingering
because it is difficult for a client who is malingering to maintain
consistency with the false or exaggerated claims for extended periods.
Malingering can be detected by discrepancies between the claimed
distress and the objective findings or lack of cooperation during
evaluation and in complying with prescribed treatment. Clues may be
reports of rare or improbable symptoms. Rare symptoms—by definition—
occur very infrequently, and clients almost never report improbable
359
symptoms. In addition, social workers should watch closely for internal or
external inconsistent presentation of symptoms. Often diagnosis comes
as a result of the use of collateral data beyond the social work interview.
Malingering is different from factitious disorder (in which the motive is
the desire to occupy a sick role, rather than some form of material gain)
and somatic symptom and related disorders (in which symptoms are not
produced willfully).
Three categories of malingering are:
■ Pure malingering (feigning a nonexistent disorder)
■ Partial malingering (consciously exaggerating real symptoms)
■ False imputation (ascribing real symptoms to a cause a client know
unrelated to the symptoms)
BASIC MEDICAL TERMINOLOGY
248
Social workers must recognize the relationship between physical well-
being and mental status. Social workers should always rule out medical
etiology before making psychiatric diagnoses. A differential
diagnosis is a systematic diagnostic method used to identify the
presence of an entity where multiple alternatives are possible.
Social workers must know the major body systems and medical
conditions associated with them that can affect psychological functioning
and mood.
1. Circulatory System
The circulatory system is the body’s transport system. It is made
up of a group of organs that transport blood throughout the body.
The heart pumps the blood and the arteries and veins transport it.
2. Digestive System
The digestive system is made up of organs that break down food
into protein, vitamins, minerals, carbohydrates, and fats, which the
body needs for energy, growth, and repair.
3. Endocrine System
The endocrine system is made up of a group of glands that
produce the body’s long-distance messengers, or hormones.
360
Hormones are chemicals that control body functions, such as
metabolism, growth, and sexual development.
4. Immune System
The immune system is a body’s defense system against infections
and diseases. Organs, tissues, cells, and cell products work
together to respond to dangerous organisms (like viruses or
bacteria) and substances that may enter the body from the
environment.
5. Lymphatic System
The lymphatic system is also a defense system for the body. It
filters out organisms that cause disease, produces white blood
cells, and generates disease-fighting antibodies. It also distributes
fluids and nutrients in the body and drains excess fluids and
protein so that tissues do not swell.
6. Muscular System
The muscular system is made up of tissues that work with the
skeletal system to control movement of the body. Some muscles—
like those in arms and legs—are voluntary, meaning that an
individual decides when to move them. Other muscles, like the
ones in the stomach, heart, intestines, and other organs, are
involuntary. This means that they are controlled automatically by
the nervous system and hormones—one often does not realize
they are at work.
7. Nervous System
The nervous system is made up of the brain, the spinal cord, and
nerves. One of the most important systems in the body, the
nervous system is the body’s control system. It sends, receives,
and processes nerve impulses throughout the body. These nerve
impulses tell muscles and organs what to do and how to respond
to the environment.
Reproductive System
8. 249
The reproductive system allows humans to produce children.
Sperm from the male fertilizes the female’s egg, or ovum, in the
fallopian tube. The fertilized egg travels from the fallopian tube to
the uterus, where the fetus develops over a period of 9 months.
9. Respiratory System
361
The respiratory system brings air into the body and removes
carbon dioxide. It includes the nose, trachea, and lungs.
10. Skeletal System
The skeletal system is made up of bones, ligaments, and tendons.
It shapes the body and protects organs. The skeletal system
works with the muscular system to help the body move.
11. Urinary System
The urinary system eliminates waste from the body in the form of
urine. The kidneys remove waste from the blood. The waste
combines with water to form urine.
THE INDICATORS OF BEHAVIORAL DYSFUNCTION
“ Normal” and “abnormal” depend on the person, place, and situation, and
are largely shaped by social standards. Definitions of “normal” change
with societal standards and norms. Normality is often viewed as good,
whereas abnormality is seen as bad. When people do not conform to
what is perceived as “normal,” they are often given a number of negative
labels, including unusual, sick, or disabled. These labels can lead to that
individual being marginalized, or stigmatized.
The most comprehensive attempt to distinguish normality from
abnormality is the DSM. The DSM shows how normality has changed
throughout history and how it often involves value judgments. The DSM
explicitly distinguishes mental disorders and nondisordered conditions.
PLACEMENT OPTIONS BASED ON ASSESSED LEVEL OF
CARE
Social workers must assess the client’s needed level of care, with the
belief that there should be a continuum of intensity depending upon the
level of crisis. Clients should enter treatment at a level appropriate to their
needs and then step up to more intense treatment or down to less intense
treatment as needed. An effective continuum of care features successful
transfer of a client between levels of care.
Levels of care for behavioral health services, for example, vary from
early intervention services/outpatient services to intensive
outpatient/partial hospitalization to residential/inpatient services.
362
Early intervention or outpatient services are appropriate unless a
client is experiencing crisis or at risk for residential/inpatient services,
which may then warrant a step up to intensive outpatient or partial
hospitalization. The goal is to serve clients in the least restrictive
environment, while ensuring health and safety.
METHODS TO ASSESS ORGANIZATIONAL FUNCTIONING
250
(E.G., AGENCY ASSESSMENTS)
There are many ways to measure the functioning and effectiveness of
organizations. For example, the functioning can be analyzed related to
productivity, turnover, stability, cohesion, and so on. Usually, functioning is
assessed as it relates to organizational structures, processes, and
outcomes.
Structural indicators influence the capacity of the organization for
effective performance. Assessments aimed at organizational structure
evaluate organizational features, such as training, equipment, office
space, and so on or worker characteristics including degrees attained and
licenses held. Structural characteristics form the basis for accreditation
reviews and licensing. When an organization is not operating efficiently or
effectively, a review of the available structural resources is often
completed to determine the extent to which they may be responsible for
the problems.
Evaluations of organizational processes assess effort rather than
effect. Formative evaluations look at how the work gets done in
organizations and the satisfaction of those doing the work, rather than the
ultimate outcomes or performance. Given that the majority of social work
services are delivered in organizations with complex structures, it is
essential to determine the extent to which processes inhibit or promote
quality outcomes.
Outcomes assessment determines the extent to which tangible,
defined differences have been made. Though essential, these
assessments can be difficult to make due to threats to internal validity.
The complexity of organizational assessments varies widely. They
can be as simple as asking stakeholders for feedback on how the
organization is operating or can involve intensive, structured work plans,
information collection and analyses, and reporting. Typically this
complexity is driven by financial and time constraints and the degree to
363
which there is concern about the organization’s performance and
effectiveness.
DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS METHODS
Qualitative research usually involves collecting information through
unstructured interviews, observation, and/or focus groups. Data can be
collected from a single individual at a time or multiple people in group
settings. Qualitative data collection methods are usually very time
consuming, so they are confined to smaller samples than usually found in
quantitative approaches. Quantitative research mainly collects data
through the input of responses to research instruments containing
questions (i.e., such as questionnaires). Information can be input either
by the respondents themselves (e.g., online or mail survey) or social
workers can input data (e.g., phone surveys or interviews). Methods for
distributing surveys are via postal mail, phone, website, or in person.
However, newer technologies have created additional delivery options,
including through wireless devices such as smartphones.
Social workers can also do research using secondary data, which is
information that has already been collected for other purposes. Use of
existing data is efficient since time and money associated with data
collection are spared. However, the completeness of existing data, as
well as its reliability, may be a concern as sound research practices
251
covering its collection may not have been used.
Data analysis procedures begin with preparation that involves
cleaning the data, checking it for accuracy, coding it for analysis,
developing a database, and entering the data into the computer.
Once entered into the computer, descriptive statistics are used to
describe the basic features of the data. They provide simple summaries
about the sample and the measures. Together with simple graphics
analysis, they form the basis of virtually every quantitative analysis of
data. Descriptive statistics describe what the data shows.
Inferential statistics are used to answer research questions or test
models or hypotheses. In many cases, the conclusions from inferential
statistics extend beyond the immediate data. For instance, inferential
statistics determine the probability that an observed difference between
groups is a dependable one or one that might have happened by chance.
In most research, analyses include both descriptive and inferential
statistics. Social workers must balance the level of detail that is included
364
in a research report with the need to avoid overwhelming readers and
missing the highlighting of major findings. If too much detail is included,
readers may not be able to pick out the key results. Analysis details are
appropriately relegated to appendices, reserving only the most critical
analysis summaries for the body of the report itself.
When reading and interpreting experimental research findings, social
workers must be able to identify independent variables (or those that are
believed to be causes) and dependent variables (which are the impacts
or results). In many studies, the independent variable is the treatment
provided and the dependent variable is the target behavior that is trying to
be changed.
The reliability and validity of research findings should also be
assessed.
Reliability (dependability, stability, consistency, predictability): Can
you get the same answer repeatedly?
Validity (accuracy): Is what is believed to be measured actually being
measured or is it something else?
External validity: Can the results be generalized?
Internal validity: Is there confidence in cause/effect?
252
365
CHAPTER253
6
Treatment Planning
METHODS TO INVOLVE CLIENTS/CLIENT SYSTEMS IN
INTERVENTION PLANNING
The participation of clients in the process of identifying what is important
to them now and in the future, and acting upon these priorities, is
paramount. Clients’ participation in the process will reduce resistance,
increase motivation to change, and ensure sustainability of progress
made.
In order to involve clients, social workers must continually listen to,
learn about, and facilitate opportunities with clients who they are serving.
Client involvement should not just occur during intervention planning, but
instead during the entire problem-solving process.
The problem-solving process drives intervention planning.
In engagement, a social worker should be actively involved with a
client in determining why treatment was sought; what has precipitated
the desire to change now; the parameters of the helping relationship,
including defining the roles of a social worker and client; and the
expectations for treatment (what will occur and when it will happen).
Client involvement is essential in determining what is important to a
client now and in the future.
In assessment, a client is the source of providing essential
information upon which to define the problem and solutions, as well as
identifying collateral contacts from which gaps in data can be collected.
In planning, a client and social worker must develop a common
understanding of a client’s preferred lifestyle. Goals are developed from
this common understanding in order to provide a direction to help a
client move toward this lifestyle. Specific action plans are developed and
366
agreed upon in order to specify who will do what, what and how
resources will be needed and used, and timelines for implementation
and review.
In planning, a social worker and client should be:
1. Defining the problem (in a well-defined, clear, and data-driven forma
2. Examining the causes of the problem and how it relates to oth
positive/negative aspects of a client’s life
3.
Generating possible solutions that will impact on the problem
254
4. Identifying the driving and restraining forces related
implementation of each of the possible solutions
5. Rating the driving and restraining forces related to consistency an
potency
6. Prioritizing these solutions based on these ratings
7. Developing SMART objectives—Specific, Measurable, Achievab
Relevant, and Time-specific—related to the chosen solutions
8. Creating strategies and activities related to the objectives
In intervention, a client must be actively involved in mobilizing a
support network to realize continued progress and sustainable change.
A client must bring to the attention of a social worker issues that arise
which may threaten goal attainment. Progress, based upon client
reports, must be tracked and plans/timelines adjusted accordingly.
In evaluation, subjective reports of a client, in conjunction with
objective indicators of progress, should be used to determine when
goals or objectives have been met and whether new goals or objectives
should be set. Client self-monitoring is a good way to involve a client so
the client can see and track progress.
In termination, a client should reflect on what has been achieved and
anticipate what supports are in place if problems arise again. Although
this is the last phase of the problem-solving process, it still requires
active involvement by both a social worker and client.
367
CULTURAL CONSIDERATIONS IN THE CREATION OF AN
INTERVENTION PLAN
It is essential that a social worker factor cultural considerations into
treatment or intervention planning. These considerations should include
the identification of cross-cultural barriers, which may hinder a client’s
engagement and/or progress in treatment.
Social workers also have an ethical mandate to take information
learned when working with individual clients and adapt agency
resources to meet others who may also have similar cultural
considerations and/or language assistance needs.
Social workers who provide electronic social work services must be
aware of cultural and socioeconomic differences among clients and how
they may use electronic technology. Social workers should assess all
issues (cultural, environmental, economic, mental or physical ability, and
linguistic) that may affect the delivery or use of these services.
A social worker should understand and validate each client’s cultural
norms, beliefs, and values. Areas in treatment or intervention planning
that can be greatly influenced by cultural factors include identification of
client strengths and problems, goals and objectives, and modalities of
treatment.
For example, a client’s culture can provide the client with strengths
that can be brought to the intervention process. These strengths can
include, but are not limited to:
■ Supportive family and community relations
■ Community and cultural events and activities
■ 255
Faith and spiritual or religious beliefs
■ Multilingual capabilities
■ Healing practices and beliefs
■ Participation in rituals (religious, cultural, familial, spiritua
community)
■ Dreams and aspirations
A culturally informed intervention plan must be based on a
therapeutic relationship in which a client feels safe to explore problems
368
within the client’s cultural context.
Intervention will be most effective when it is consistent with a
consumer’s culture. A social worker should consider the following given
their cultural appropriateness:
■ Individual versus group treatment
■ Alternative treatment approaches (yoga, aromatherapy, mus
writing)
■ Medication (western, traditional, and/or alternative)
■ Family involvement
■ Location/duration of intervention
Different cultures and communities exhibit or explain symptoms in
various ways. Because of this, it is important for social workers to be
aware of relevant contextual information stemming from clients’ cultures,
races, ethnicities, religious affiliations, and/or geographical origins so
social workers can more accurately diagnose client problems, as well as
more effectively treat them.
The Cultural Formulation Interview Guide is included in the DSM to
help social workers assess cultural factors influencing clients’
perspectives of their symptoms and treatment options. It includes
questions about clients’ backgrounds in terms of their culture, race,
ethnicity, religion, or geographical origin. Use of this tool provides an
opportunity for clients to define their distress in their own words and then
relate this distress to how others, who may not share their culture, see
their problems.
THE CRITERIA USED IN THE SELECTION OF
INTERVENTION/TREATMENT MODALITIES (E.G.,
CLIENT/CLIENT SYSTEM ABILITIES, CULTURE, LIFE
STAGE)
Social workers are employed in different settings, such as hospitals,
mental health centers, child welfare agencies, schools, and correctional
facilities. In addition, clients within these settings have different needs or
problems. The types of interventions or treatments used by social
369
workers are strongly influenced by both practice settings and the needs
or problems of clients.
Social work interventions/treatments must be selected based upon
the biopsychosocial–spiritual–cultural assessments of clients, which
include the strengths that they possess, as well as the identification of
feasible and desired outcomes within these larger service contexts.
There are diverse intervention or treatment models within
256
gerontology, behavioral health, child welfare, and so forth.
Interventions include those at the micro, mezzo, and macro levels. Micro
interventions include, but are not limited to, the provision of therapy,
case management, education, and/or crisis intervention. Macro
interventions include advocacy and organizing.
In all instances, social workers should work in partnership with
clients to select and reevaluate choices related to the selection of
intervention or treatment approaches. Social workers should also keep
abreast of research done on the effectiveness of these strategies and
select those that are evidence based.
A social worker develops an intervention plan by consulting the
relevant practice research and then flexibly implementing an approach to
fit a client’s needs and circumstances. The intervention plan is driven by
the data collected as part of assessment. Assessment is informed by
current human behavior and development research that provides key
information about how clients behave and research about risk and
resilience factors that affect human functioning. These theories inform
social workers about what skills, techniques, and strategies must be
used by social workers, clients, and others for the purpose of improving
well-being. These techniques and strategies are outlined in an
intervention plan.
An intervention plan should be reviewed during the intervention, at
termination, and, if possible, following the termination of services to
make adjustments, ensure progress, and determine the sustainability of
change after treatment.
THE COMPONENTS OF INTERVENTION, TREATMENT, AND
SERVICE PLANS
Planning is the bridge between assessment and intervention. It begins
with specifying goals that a client hopes to achieve, then identifying what
370
changes need to be made to achieve the goals, the change strategies
needed to reach the goals, and the timelines for completing these
actions.
Effective planning is the responsibility of both a social worker and a
client. A social worker supports a client while structuring the process,
and a client evaluates alternative courses of action. Planning should be
based on information collected during the assessment phase.
It is important for a social worker and a client to develop a contract
(i.e., an agreement that spells out the activities to be conducted by each,
along with a timetable for action). A contract can be a written,
oral, or even implied agreement, although the more
specific a contract, the more likely it is to prevent
misunderstandings. A contract should delineate the
problems or concerns to be addressed, goals and
objectives of the intervention, activities that a client will
undertake, tasks to be performed by a social worker,
expected duration of the intervention, schedule of time
and place for meetings, and/or identification of other
persons, agencies, or organizations expected to assist
with the change process.
Except in instances in which contracts are written into court orders,
contracts are not viewed as legally binding.
Contracts are also known as service agreements/plans, case plans,
treatment plans, intervention plans, or individual/family support plans.
The greater the specificity about who will do what, when, and how,
the greater the chances of the plan being fully implemented. Contracting
is often reassuring to clients because it provides blueprints for change. It
also encourages social workers to rethink assumptions and steps,
ensuring that all change efforts are unique to individual client situations.
THEORIES OF TRAUMA-INFORMED CARE
257
Trauma-informed care organizations, programs, and services are based
on an understanding of the vulnerabilities or triggers of trauma survivors
that traditional service delivery approaches may exacerbate, so that
371
these services and programs can be more supportive and avoid re-
traumatization.
Trauma-informed care also can be viewed as an overarching
philosophy and approach based on the understanding that many clients
have suffered traumatic experiences and providers must be responsible
for being sensitive to this issue, regardless of whether clients are being
treated specifically for the trauma. Therefore, social workers should
initially approach all of their clients as if they have a trauma history,
regardless of the services for which the clients are being seen.
It is important for social workers to understand trauma and how it
affects people regardless of their diagnoses or identified needs. Thus, in
everyday practice, social workers need to recognize how the
organizations, programs, and environments in which they practice could
potentially act as trauma triggers for their clients; social workers should
make every effort to minimize these triggers.
An important component of trauma-informed care is recognizing
trauma’s centrality to clients and how this plays into their perception of
physical and emotional safety, relationships, and behaviors. When
trauma goes unrecognized, it can be difficult to understand clients’
behaviors or attitudes, and social workers may be tempted to assign
unfounded pathologies to clients. Clients even may end up being barred
from services as a result of what appears to be bizarre behavior or
unfounded beliefs. Often, however, clients’ otherwise challenging
behavior is provoked by a legitimate trigger that easily could have been
avoided.
METHODS AND APPROACHES TO TRAUMA-INFORMED
CARE
Although there are many specific interventions or treatments used with
clients who have suffered trauma, they all recognize that there are
phases of trauma treatment. However, clients rarely proceed through
them in a linear fashion. Social workers’ knowledge of these phases
should inform the use of specific interventions. For example, if a client is
in the safety and stability phase, exposure therapies, which reduce
avoidant behaviors and increase exposure to trauma-related material,
are not recommended. In addition, classical psychodynamic treatment
may be too destabilizing for a client inundated by flashbacks and
372
intrusive thoughts. Thus, a trauma-informed social worker uses the
three-phase model for choosing and using appropriate treatment
strategies.
Phase 1: Safety and Stabilization
This initial stage is focused on establishing safety and stability, which
must occur for trauma treatment to proceed. For many trauma survivors,
basic needs, as described in Maslow’s hierarchy of needs, are not being
met. Survivors may need housing, food, and/or other essentials. In
addition, survivors of complex trauma are often engaged in trauma
reenactments in their lives. This means that they are frequently in
relationships that are physically and/or emotionally dangerous. They
may also be using substances, engaged in self-harm, and/or exhibiting
risky or suicidal behaviors.
In this phase, social work interventions include case management to
258
obtain housing, health services, transportation, and other critical
supports. Crisis intervention models aimed at developing safety plans
and establishing equilibrium or stability are also used. Stabilization
focuses on the replacement of problematic and risky coping strategies
with others that are nonharmful. At this phase of treatment, interventions
that improve clients’ capacities to regulate emotion, self-soothe, use
relationships appropriately, and/or develop compassion for self are
central.
Phase 2: Mourning and Remembrance
The second stage is when survivors acknowledge and speak about what
happened and are ready to integrate experiences into a larger life
context. This process allows emotional space in which the future can be
constructed. Addressing what is and is not remembered is the focus of
creating healing stories about the trauma experienced. Psychoeducation
can be a very important component of addressing questions about the
trauma experience and its effects. Trauma always results in a loss of
some kind. Grief for what was, for what never was, and/or for what could
have been must be addressed.
Phase 3: Reconnection and Reintegration
The third stage is marked by a commitment to move forward in life,
searching for ways to use the trauma experience for empowerment.
373
Trauma survivors may engage in new activities and/or relationships. A
client moves from surviving into a new identity marked by an
understanding of the client’s history of trauma. Therapeutic strategies
include integration of self-care strategies into everyday life and
developing deepening resilience.
A good trauma-informed approach is multidimensional. The following
list includes several elements that indicate a good, trauma-informed
program:
Environment of Care
■ Soothing colors for decor and paint
■ Overall quiet; soft music
■ Neutral or pleasant aroma
■ Individual chairs with discrete seating areas
■ Individual bathroom options
Staff Appearance
■ Attire connotes professionalism; easy to identify staff members
■ Clothing not sexually provocative
Staff Behavior
■ Clearly demonstrate proper manners and respect
■ 259
Make every effort to minimize delays
■ Speak in clear, nonthreatening tones
■ Make eye contact
■ Smile and demonstrate a generally pleasant demeanor
■ Open physical stance, nodding
■ Open to change/not rigid
Organizational Understanding
374
■ Trauma policy/philosophy in place
■ Commitment to trauma-informed care articulated
■ All staff/clients/family members taught about trauma and its impact
■ Universal trauma screenings for all clients
■ Trauma status continually assessed
■ Clear organization plan for dealing with behavioral crises
■ Discrete areas for calming or crisis management identified
■ Feedback valued and concerted outreach efforts made
Treatment Considerations
■ Treatment goals reflect consumer preferences
■ Treatment integrated across disciplines
■ Offering choice of treatment provider when possible
■ Everyday language used
■ All statements of abuse acknowledged and addressed
■ Sensitivity to seating configuration and proximity of seating options
■ Co-occurring treatment needs assessed and incorporated into servi
provided
■ Culture of origin respected and incorporated into service planning
■ Recognize the importance of physical boundaries and aware th
touch—sometimes even a handshake—could trigger trauma
■ Avoid jokes and stories which can serve as triggers
THE IMPACT OF IMMIGRATION, REFUGEE, OR
UNDOCUMENTED STATUS ON SERVICE DELIVERY
Social workers may have a general concept of immigration
requirements, but this area of law is both complex and volatile. Laws and
policies affecting the status of immigrants have evolved over time in
375
response to various social, political, and economic pressures. Most
recently, immigration policy has had an exclusionary focus that has
turned toward conflating criminality and undocumented immigration
status. Although immigration laws are within the exclusive purview of the
federal government, some states have attempted to address concerns
by passing their own measures. This situation creates legal
260
questions and ethical dilemmas for social workers who are employed
in programs or areas serving immigrants.
Professional social work standards support immigration and refugee
policies that uphold and support equity and human rights, while
protecting national security. The social work profession recognizes the
challenge of competing claims; however, immigration policies must
promote social justice and avoid racism and discrimination or profiling on
the basis of race, religion, country of origin, gender, or other grounds.
The impact of refugee and immigration policies on families and children
have to be closely monitored. Policies that encourage family
reunification and ensure that children do not grow up unduly
disadvantaged by the immigration status of their parents must be
enacted and upheld.
Given the great diversity and myriad needs of the growing immigrant
population, it is essential that social workers understand the legal and
political, as well as psychological and social, issues surrounding
immigration. Undocumented immigrants represent a large and
vulnerable population. When conducting individual practice with
undocumented immigrants, social workers must be aware of the laws
that impact service provision and the unique psychosocial stressors that
are experienced by this population.
Numerous immigrant households comprise mixed-status families in
which family members hold different legal statuses. Each status carries
different benefit entitlements, services, and legal rights.
METHODS TO DEVELOP, REVIEW, AND IMPLEMENT CRISIS
PLANS
A crisis is defined as an acute disruption of psychological homeostasis
(steady state) in which usual coping mechanisms fail and there exists
evidence of distress and functional impairment. The subjective reaction
376
to a stressful life is a compromised stability and ability to cope or
function.
Given such a definition, it is imperative that social workers have a
framework or blueprint to guide them in responding. When confronted by
clients in crisis, social workers need to address their distress,
impairment, and instability by operating in a logical and orderly process.
Social workers can easily exacerbate crises with well-intentioned, but
haphazard responding. Comprehensive plans allow for responses that
are active and directive, but do not take problem ownership away from
clients. Finally, plans should meet clients where they are at, assessing
their levels of risk, mobilizing client resources, and moving strategically
to stabilize the crisis and improve functioning.
The development, review, and implementation of crises plans require
actions aimed at crisis stabilization, resolution, and mastery. Social
workers should:
1. Plan and conduct a thorough biopsychosocial and lethality/immine
danger assessment.
2. Make psychological contact and rapidly establish the collaborativ
relationship.
3. Identify the major problems, including crisis precipitants.
4. Encourage an exploration of feelings and emotions.
5. Generate and explore alternatives and new coping strategies.
6. Restore functioning through implementation of an action plan.
7. Plan follow-up and “booster” sessions.
DISCHARGE, AFTERCARE, AND FOLLOW-UP
PLANNING
261
Discharge may occur for a variety of reasons; for example, a client may
have met the goals or no longer needs the services; decides not to
continue to receive them from a particular social worker or in general;
and/or requires a different level of care. In addition, when a social worker
leaves an agency, a client may continue to receive the same service
from this agency, but from another worker. Although this is not a
377
“discharge” from services, there is careful planning and standards that
need to be followed to ensure continuity of care and prevent gaps in
service.
The NASW Code of Ethics provides some guidance with regard to
discharge or terminations, as well as aftercare and follow-up services.
Social workers should terminate services to clients and professional
relationships with them when such services and relationships are no
longer required or no longer serve client needs or interests (NASW Code
of Ethics—Termination of Services).
Social workers should take reasonable steps to avoid abandoning
clients who are still in need of services. Social workers should withdraw
services precipitously only under unusual circumstances, giving careful
consideration to all factors in the situation and taking care to minimize
possible adverse effects. Social workers should assist in making
appropriate arrangements for continuation of services when necessary
(NASW Code of Ethics—Termination of Services).
Social workers in fee-for-service settings may terminate services to
clients who are not paying an overdue balance if the financial
contractual arrangements have been made clear to a client, if a client
does not pose an imminent danger to self or others, and if the clinical
and other consequences of the current nonpayment have been
addressed and discussed with a client (NASW Code of Ethics—
Termination of Services).
Social workers should not terminate services to pursue a social,
financial, or sexual relationship with a client (NASW Code of Ethics—
Termination of Services).
Social workers who anticipate the termination or interruption of
services to clients should notify clients promptly and seek the transfer,
referral, or continuation of services in relation to client needs and
preferences (NASW Code of Ethics—Termination of Services).
Social workers who are leaving an employment setting should inform
clients of appropriate options for the continuation of services and of the
benefits and risks of the options (NASW Code of Ethics—Termination of
Services).
It is unethical to continue to treat clients when services are no longer
needed or in their best interests.
Another standard that is relevant to termination of services (NASW
Code of Ethics—Interruption of Services) mandates that social workers
should make reasonable efforts to ensure continuity of services in the
378
event that services are interrupted by factors such as unavailability,
disruptions in electronic communication, relocation, illness, disability, or
death.
Social workers must involve clients and their families (when
appropriate) in making their own decisions about follow-up services or
aftercare. Involvement must include, at a minimum, discussion of client
and family preferences (when appropriate).
Social workers are often responsible for coordination of clients’
follow-up services, when needed.
A return of clients to services quickly may suggest either that they
did not receive needed follow-up services or that these services were
inadequate. Termination may have occurred prematurely.
Clients who are at high risk for developing problems after services
have ended should receive regular assessments after discharge to
determine whether services are needed or discharge plans are being
implemented as planned.
TECHNIQUES USED TO EVALUATE A CLIENT’S/CLIENT
SYSTEM’S PROGRESS
262
Evaluating progress is a critical part of the problem-solving process.
Examining with a client what has occurred and what still needs to occur
involves the client in treatment decisions.
Evaluation methods can be simple or complex. They can rely on
quantitative information that shows data on reductions in target
behaviors, health care improvements, or psychiatric symptom increases,
and/or qualitative information in which a client and/or social worker
subjectively report on progress made in various areas.
When evaluating progress, a social worker and client should gather
all needed information and identify factors that helped or hindered
progress. Goals outlined in the contract/service plan should be modified,
if needed, based upon the outcome of the evaluation.
Social workers should assist clients to understand the progress they
have made so they can clearly understand and celebrate their
accomplishments, as well as identify areas that need attention. This
process should ensure that clients understand why progress has
happened, as well as include a dialogue about any changes that need to
occur in the problem-solving process to facilitate continued growth.
379
METHODS, TECHNIQUES, AND INSTRUMENTS USED TO
EVALUATE SOCIAL WORK PRACTICE
Social workers have an ethical mandate to ensure that they are
providing the most efficient and effective services possible. They also
must do no harm and ensure that the intervention provided enhances
the well-being of clients.
These goals require the evaluation of practice. Routine practice
evaluation by social workers can enhance treatment outcomes and
agency decision making, planning, and accountability.
There are two main types of evaluations—formative and summative.
Formative evaluations examine the process of delivering services,
whereas summative evaluations examine the outcomes.
Formative evaluations are ongoing processes that allow for
feedback to be implemented during service delivery. These types of
evaluations allow social workers to make changes as needed to help
achieve program goals. Needs assessments can be viewed as one type
of formative evaluation.
Summative evaluations occur at the end of services and
provide an overall description of their effectiveness. Summative
evaluation examines outcomes to determine whether objectives were
met. Summative evaluations enable decisions to be made regarding
future service directions that cannot be made during implementation.
Impact evaluations and cost–benefit analyses are types of summative
evaluations.
There are ethical standards that must be followed when evaluating
practice (NASW Code of Ethics—Evaluation and Research). Some of
these guidelines include:
1.
Obtaining voluntary and written informed consent from clients,
when appropriate, without any implied or actual deprivation or
penalty for refusal to participate; without undue inducement to
263
participate; and with due regard for participants’ well-being,
privacy, and dignity
2. Informing clients of their right to withdraw from evaluation an
research at any time without penalty
3. Ensuring clients in evaluations have access to appropriate supportiv
380
services
4. Avoiding conflicts of interest and dual relationships with those bein
evaluated
THE PRINCIPLES AND FEATURES OF OBJECTIVE AND
SUBJECTIVE DATA
A social worker uses both objective and subjective data throughout the
problem-solving process. For example, in assessment, a social worker
must understand the “facts” related to a client’s situation (objective data),
but also how those “facts” are perceived by the client through
descriptions of feelings, experiences, and perceptions (subjective data).
It is not the objective facts that determine whether an event is traumatic,
but a subjective emotional experience of the event. Thus, having a client
describe the meaning of an event is critically important.
Treatment plans are often developed and progress is often assessed
based upon objective and subjective data-gathered by a social worker.
For example, in health care, a SOAP format is often used.
S (Subjective): The subjective component is a client’s report of
how the client has been doing since the last visit and/or what brought a
client into treatment.
O (Objective): In health care, the objective component includes
vital signs (temperature, blood pressure, pulse, and respiration),
documentation of any physical examinations, and results of laboratory
tests. In other settings, this section may include other objective
indicators of problems such as disorientation, failing school, legal issues,
and so forth.
A (Assessment): A social worker pulls together the objective and
subjective findings and consolidates them into a short assessment.
P (Plan): The plan includes what will be done as a consequence of
the assessment.
Lastly, in evaluation, subjective reports of a client, in conjunction with
objective indicators of progress, should be used to determine when
goals or objectives have been met and whether new goals or objectives
should be set. Client self-monitoring (subjective data) is a good way to
involve a client so the client can see and track progress toward goal
attainment.
381
BASIC AND APPLIED RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS
Social work research needs a design or a structure before data
collection or analysis can commence. The function of a research design
is to ensure that the evidence or data collected enables the research
questions to be answered. Research design is different from the method
by which data are collected. Many research methods texts confuse
research designs with methods. It is not uncommon to see research
design treated as a mode of data collection rather than as a logical
structure of the inquiry.
Research design is a blueprint, with the research problem
264
determining the type of design used. The research process will:
1. Identify the research problem clearly and justify its selection.
2. Review previously published literature associated with the proble
area.
3. Clearly and explicitly specify hypotheses (i.e., research question
central to the problem selected.
4. Effectively describe the data that will be necessary for an adequa
test of the hypotheses and explain how such data will be obtained.
5. Describe the methods of analysis that will be applied to the data
determining whether or not the hypotheses are true or false.
Types of Research
There are three broad types of research— experimental, quasi-
experimental, and pre-experimental. Randomized experiments, also
called “experimental,” are the most rigorous. When randomization of
subjects or groups is neither practical nor feasible, quasi-experimental
approaches can be used. Quasi-experimental research uses intervention
and comparison groups, but assignment to the groups is nonrandom.
Pre-experimental studies contain intervention groups only and lack
comparison/control groups, making them the weakest.
Single-Subject Research
Single-subject research aims to determine whether an intervention has
the intended impact on a client, or on many clients who form a group.
382
The most common single-subject research is pre- and post-test or
single-case study (AB) in which there is a comparison of behavior before
treatment (baseline; denoted by an “A”) and behavior after the start of
treatment (intervention; denoted by a “B”). The reversal or multiple
baseline (ABA or ABAB) is also commonly used.
In single-subject research, a client is used as the client’s own control.
The focus differs from experimental research, which looks at the
average effect of an intervention between groups of people.
Single-subject research is ideal for studying the behavioral change a
client exhibits as a result of some treatment. When done correctly and
carefully, single-subject research can show a causal effect between the
intervention and the outcome.
The flexibility, simplicity, and low cost of single-subject research are
also beneficial. It can be more flexible and easier to plan because it is
usually smaller in scale than experimental research.
Attempts should be made to maximize both internal and external validity.
Internal validity addresses the extent to which causal inferences can
be made about the intervention and the targeted behavior. External
validity addresses how generalizable those inferences are to the
265
general population. Due to the small number of study participants,
single-subject research tends to have poor external validity, limiting the
ability to generalize the findings to a wider audience.
It is important to remember that, in some cases, it would be unethical
to withdraw treatment if clients would be put at risk for harm. Also, in a
crisis, treatment would not be delayed in an effort to obtain baseline
data.
METHODS TO ASSESS RELIABILITY AND VALIDITY IN
SOCIAL WORK RESEARCH
Reliability in social work research concerns the ability to get consistent
assessments or data by reducing random errors associated with its
collection. There are four main methods to assess reliability.
■ Interrater or Interobserver Reliability
Assesses the degree to which different raters/observers give
consistent estimates of the same phenomenon
383
■ Test–Retest Reliability
Assesses the consistency of a measure from one time to another
■ Parallel Forms Reliability
Assesses the consistency of the results of two tests constructed in
the same way from the same content domain
■ Internal Consistency Reliability
Assesses the consistency of results across items within a test
Validity is the degree to which what is being measured is what is
claimed to be measured. It attempts to minimize systematic errors
that may yield reliable results but do not actually assess the
constructs of interest. There are different means to assess validity.
■ Face Validity
Examines whether the assessments “on their face” measure the
constructs
■ Content Validity
Examines whether all of the relevant content domains are covered
■ Criterion-Related Validity (including predictive, concurren
convergent, and discriminant validities)
Examines whether constructs perform as anticipated in relation to
other theoretical constructs
Predictive validity assesses whether constructs predict what they
should theoretically be able to predict.
Concurrent validity assesses whether constructs distinguish
266
between groups that should be able to be distinguished.
Convergent validity assesses the degree to which constructs are
similar to (converge on) other constructs to which they should be
similar.
Discriminant validity assesses the degree to which constructs are
different from (diverge away from) other constructs to which they
should be dissimilar.
Content Area II: Practice Questions
267
384
The following section has 51 unique practice questions that assess
retention of material related to assessment, diagnosis, and
treatment planning. The number of questions reflects the
approximate proportion of a typical exam (30%) devoted to this
content.
1. Which of the following mental health conditions or states is not
typically assessed using the Minnesota Multiphasic Personality
Inventory?
A. Paranoia
B. Depression
C. Substance use
2. Which statement BEST describes the difference between
screening and assessment in social work practice?
A. Screening focuses on determining potential problems that
need more thorough assessment aimed at diagnosis and
treatment
B. Screening is completed by paraprofessionals while
assessment requires skill and expertise associated with
education and training
C. Screening consists of asking very structured questions while
assessments are less formal
3. A hospital social worker is charged with completing a
biopsychosocial–spiritual–cultural assessment on a client upon
admission. In the biological section of the assessment, the social
worker lists the client’s current medications, weight, height,
blood pressure, and subjective assessment of well-being. The
social worker then moves on to the psychological section of the
assessment. Which of the following will BEST describe the
assessment of the social worker’s supervisor with regard to the
biological section?
A. Complete because it gives critical information about the
385
client’s current physical well-being
B. Useful in understanding the current functioning of the client
C. Incomplete because the narrative lacks the client’s current
medical problems and history
269
4.
Which of the following is MOST commonly used to identify
sexual dysfunction?
A. Client self-reports
B. Medical screenings
C. Biopsychosocial assessments
5. When collecting sensitive information in a social work interview,
a social worker should:
A. Ask sensitive questions in the latter part of the interaction
B. Reiterate limits to confidentiality that may require the
release of the sensitive information
C. Offer the opportunity to provide the sensitive information
anonymously
6. Which of the following behaviors is MOST likely an indicator of
resistance by a client?
A. Engaging in small talk about irrelevant topics during a
session
B. Limiting the amount of sensitive information communicated
during treatment
C. Arriving late to an initial session after being referred by
another person
7. A client who has just been fired from his job is focusing solely on
the stress associated with the financial challenges that he is
facing. Using a systems approach, the social worker can expect
his unemployment to:
A. Develop resiliency that can be used to deal with other life
crises
386
B. Affect other areas of his life such as his physical and mental
health
C. Result in him being worried about finding another job
271
8.
Which of the following medications is MOST likely going to
be prescribed for the treatment of attention-
deficit/hyperactivity disorder?
A. Elavil
B. Dexedrine
C. Tofranil
9. In order to meet the mandates imposed by the Tarasoff decision,
a social worker would need to:
A. Notify authorities about imminent danger likely to be
imposed by a client
B. Seek inpatient hospitalization if a client displays behavior
dangerous to self or others
C. Identify risk factors that may be present in a client that will
result in dangerousness to others
10. Which of the following is BEST indicator of low ego strength?
A. Viewing challenges as something to avoid
B. Finding new ways to deal with struggles
C. Using wishful thinking or fantasies
11. Which of the following BEST describes personality disorders?
A. Personality disorders are characterized by distorted patterns
of thinking
B. Personality disorders are resistant to change despite insight
that behaviors are problematic
C. Personality disorders are used to adapt to new situations
which challenge coping skills
387
273
12.
Which of the following is a therapeutic advantage of
injectable antipsychotic medications?
A. Injectable medications reduce medication noncompliance
B. Injectable medications can be used in addition to oral
administration of other medications
C. Injectable medications are less expensive than oral
medications
13. A social worker is delivering services to a client with borderline
personality disorder. Based on this diagnosis, which of the
following can a social worker expect from the client?
A. Poor impulse control
B. Control of aggressive drives
C. Delusional thinking
14. Which of the following is accurate about risk factors for
violence?
A. Risk factors are present only at the individual level
B. Risk factors determine who will engage in aggressive acts
C. Risk factors increase the likelihood that a community will be
affected by violence
15. A social worker is reviewing intake paperwork received for a
new 65-year-old client. The intake states that the client is
currently taking Paxil after being switched from Zoloft. Based
on the medications prescribed, which of following diagnoses is
MOST appropriate for this the client?
A. Insomnia disorder
B. Schizoaffective disorder
C. Major depressive disorder
275
16.
Which of the following statements is accurate with regard
to a diagnosis of conduct disorder?
388
A. Symptoms must cause significant impairment in social,
academic, or occupational functioning
B. Symptoms must occur in childhood, preferably before the
age of 12
C. At least one symptom must be present in the last 18 months
17. When assessing the global functioning of a client, which of the
following tests should be used by a social worker?
A. Global Assessment of Functioning Scale (GAF)
B. World Health Organization Disability Assessment Schedule
(WHODAS)
C. Thematic Apperception Test
18. According to the DSM, which of the following does not need to
be present for a client to be diagnosed with gambling disorder?
A. Lying to conceal gambling
B. Loss of relationship, job, or opportunity due to gambling
C. Legal problems associated with gambling
19. Which of the following diagnoses is MOST likely to be given
as the result of mental status examinations?
A. Delirium
B. Oppositional defiant disorder
C. Avoidant personality disorder
2
277
0
.
A social worker is worried that he does not have all the
necessary information to make a practice decision, so he uses
multiple sources to collect data. Which of the following
approaches to problem solving is the social worker using?
A. Cooptation
B. Triangulation
389
C. Social exchange
21. Which of the following systems is affected by tardive
dyskinesia, a side effect of taking antipsychotic medications?
A. Nervous system
B. Circulatory system
C. Muscular system
22. A client has been prescribed nardil to treat the client’s
depression. As a result of taking this medication, the client will
likely be required to:
A. Receive regular blood testing
B. Limit certain foods high in tyramine
C. Get her blood pressure taken frequently
23. Which of the following is a neurotransmitter in the brain that is
responsible for maintaining mood balance and depression?
A. Serotonin
B. Acetylcholine
C. Ketamine
2
279
4
.
A social worker is charged with evaluating the effectiveness of a
mental health outpatient treatment program. He constructs an
evaluation strategy that consists of collecting data on the quality
of services by holding focus groups with current clients so that
they can relay their firsthand experiences. In addition, he uses
existing agency data to compute the proportion of clients who
have been rehospitalized since admission. Which of the
following types of evaluation is the the social worker
conducting?
A. Qualitative
B. Quasi-experimental
390
C. Mixed method
25. Which of the following is a protective factor for dangerousness
to others?
A. Violence at an early age
B. Drug and/or alcohol use
C. Physical and behavioral care
26. A client reports that he was just diagnosed with Hodgkin’s
disease. Which of the major body systems is this cancer
associated?
A. Lymphatic
B. Circulatory
C. Endocrine
27. Which of the following is MOST significant limitation of using
existing case records as the basis for practice evaluations?
A. Records may not contain consistent and/or complete
information
B. Evaluations are limited to only topics contained in the case
records
C. The client’s opinions about service quality are not
considered
281
28.
Which of the following personality disorders is clustered
with antisocial personality disorder in a grouping
characterized by dramatic, emotional, and erratic
behavior?
A. Schizoid personality disorder
B. Narcissistic personality disorder
C. Obsessive-compulsive personality disorder
29. Which of the following medications is associated with an
increased risk of agranulocytosis?
391
A. Clozaril
B. Lexapro
C. Lithium
30. Which of the following impairments must be present for a client
to be diagnosed with borderline personality disorder?
A. Impairments in personality and interpersonal functioning
B. Impairments in interpersonal functioning but not personality
functioning
C. Impairments in personality functioning but not interpersonal
functioning
3
283
1
.
A client tells a social worker that he “can’t stand it anymore,” but
does not believe that he can make needed changes in his life.
He engages with the social worker in discussions about what his
life would be like without his problem behaviors. Which stage of
change is the client MOST likely engaged in?
A. Contemplation
B. Precontemplation
C. Preparation
32. A client shows up for the initial session with a coworker. The
BEST response for a social worker is to:
A. Tell the client that confidentiality policies preclude the
coworker from sitting in on the session
B. Ask the coworker to also complete all necessary intake
paperwork and releases
C. Let the client determine the extent to which the coworker
attends or participates in sessions
285
33.
Which of the following is the BEST indicator of ego
strength?
392
A. Taking responsibility for actions
B. Regulating mood swings
C. Blaming others
34. Which of the following is a diagnostic characteristic of
transvestic disorder according to the DSM?
A. The diagnosis is restricted to males
B. Significant distress caused by this disorder can only be
related to social relationships
C. Sexual arousal must result from cross-dressing
35. Which of the following is true of substance-related disorders in
the DSM?
A. Substance use disorders are diagnosed along a single
continuum measured from severe to mild
B. Legal problems due to substance use is a key diagnostic
criterion
C. Substance use places individuals in situations that increase
risk of harm to self and others
3
287
6
.
Upon intake, a client states that she “feels like hurting herself
but will be fine.” She assures the social worker that she will not
act on her feelings. In order to assist the client, the social worker
should FIRST:
A. Conduct a safety assessment
B. Acknowledge the client’s feelings and concerns
C. Determine the reasons that have caused the client to feel
this way
37. What is it called when two or more people share the same
delusion or delusional system?
393
A. Folie à deux
B. Trichotillomania
C. Comorbid psychosis
38. Which of the following DSM diagnoses is BEST used to label
intellectual difficulties as well as problems in conceptual, social,
and practical areas of living?
A. Mental retardation
B. Intellectual disability
C. Intellectual developmental disorder
39. Which of the following is a condition for further study in the
DSM?
A. Pica
B. Caffeine use disorder
C. Frotteuristic disorder
4
289
0
.
A client reports that the client is under the surveillance of the
police and that they have been following her for days, as well as
listening in on her phone conversations. There is no other
evidence to support this belief. What is MOST likely the basis of
the client’s report?
A. Hypomanic state
B. Delusion
C. Hallucination
41. A client is being discharged from an inpatient hospitalization.
Upon admission, he slept most of the time, reported extreme
despair, and felt hopeless. Several days later, while
hospitalized, he appeared jittery and agitated. His speech was
rambling, and he wandered around the unit, talking to others
for hours. He also had trouble sleeping. Which of the following
394
medications will the client MOST likely be prescribed upon
discharge?
A. Lithium
B. Ativan
C. Haldol
42. According to the DSM, how long does depressed mood need
to be present for a diagnosis of persistent depressive disorder
in adults?
A. 6 months
B. 1 year
C. 2 years
43. Which of the following must a social worker consider before
making a diagnosis of gender dysphoria?
A. Gender dysphoria is only diagnosed in adulthood after the
age of 18
B. Sexual orientation must be established before making a
diagnosis of gender dysphoria
C. A desire for physical characteristics of the identified gender
in those with gender dysphoria are not attributable to
fixation on flaws in appearance
4
291
4
.
A client has made substantial progress in treatment and has
achieved all established goals. When the social worker speaks
to the client about discharge, the client states that he does not
want to stop seeing the social worker because he is worried
about his future needs. As there are no additional treatment
goals, the social worker agrees to see the client pro bono for the
next 6 months or until the client feels comfortable. Which of the
following BEST describes the social worker’s actions?
A. Unethical because termination decisions are the
395
responsibility of the social worker
B. Unethical since there are no new treatment goals
C. Ethical since the client does not feel ready to end treatment
45. Which of the following is an objective outcome that might be
associated with a foster care program?
A. Number of children served who are reunified with their
biological families
B. Satisfaction of foster parents with the program
C. Perceived safety of children
46. Which of the following is the MOST important factor in
choosing an appropriate intervention or treatment strategy?
A. The intervention is currently being used by a social worker
to assist clients with similar problems
B. The intervention results from the biopsychosocial–spiritual–
cultural assessment of a client
C. The intervention is approved as medically necessary by
third-party payers
47. A social worker is using a SOAP documentation format. In
which of the following settings is the social worker MOST likely
employed?
A. Mental health agency
B. Hospital
C. Community action program
4
293
8
.
A social worker needs to evaluate the behavior of a client who is
living in a group home. The social worker asks two staff to each
record the frequency of the behavior independently and to
submit their tracking sheets to the social worker without sharing
396
them with one another. Which of the following approaches is the
social worker using to ensure reliability of the data collected?
A. Alternate or parallel forms
B. Interrater
C. Internal consistency
49. A social worker employed to work with juvenile offenders has
developed an innovative program that has yielded very positive
outcomes. The social worker approaches the agency director
about using the same approach with adult offenders. The
director is skeptical about its ability to achieve the same
outcomes. Which is MOST likely the basis of the director’s
concern?
A. Internal validity
B. Multicollinearity
C. External validity
50. After completing an assessment, a client states that the client
would like to work on being more assertive at work. In order to
assist the client, the social worker should FIRST:
A. Provide the client with communication strategies aimed at
self-expression
B. Gather information about communication issues at the client
current and past jobs
C. Identify the outcome that the client hopes to attain from this
behavioral change
51. A mother is very upset because she feels that her 4-year-old
daughter is “selfish” and states that the daughter does not
understand how her behavior impacts on others in the family.
She reports that the child has no problems in preschool and
gets along with peers outside the family according to their
parents. In order to BEST assist, the social worker should:
A. Work with the daughter to behave more appropriately in the
397
family unit
B. Explain the development of young children to the mother
C. Gather more information about the daughter’s development
1
268
.
C. The Minnesota Multiphasic Personality Inventory (MMPI) has
scales to measure the following clinical conditions:
hypochondriasis, indicating stress over physical health; depression,
indicating hopelessness; hysteria, indicating anxiety and tension;
psychopathic, indicating aggression, acting out, and rebellion;
masculinity–femininity, indicating gender identity; paranoia,
indicating disturbed thinking; psychasthenia, indicating worrying;
schizophrenia, indicating orientation to reality; hypomania,
indicating energy; and social introversion, indicating being
withdrawn. The MMPI is not used to assess substance use.
Question Assesses
Content Area II—Assessment, Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning;
Biopsychosocial History and Collateral Data (Competency);
Techniques and Instruments Used to Assess Clients/Client
Systems (KSA)
2. A. Screening is a process for evaluating the possible presence of a
particular problem. The outcome is normally a simple yes or no
Assessment is a process for defining the nature of that problem
determining a diagnosis, and developing specific treatment
recommendations for addressing the problem or diagnosis.
Many standardized instruments and interview protocols are
available to help social workers perform appropriate screening and
assessment. Skill and expertise may be needed for both screening
and intervention, both of which must consider client strengths.
Question Assesses
Content Area II—Assessment, Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning;
Biopsychosocial History and Collateral Data (Competency);
Techniques and Instruments Used to Assess Clients/Client
Systems (KSA)
398
3. C. The biopsychosocial–spiritual–cultural assessment provides
critical information on the current/presenting issue or issues,
including a client’s past and present physical health and
developmental milestones. In order to be complete, the biologica
section should contain a client’s medical history, developmenta
history, current medications, substance abuse history, and family
history of medical illnesses. The information that was collected from
the social worker in the vignette is acceptable but is not complete and
may not be useful as information is missing for a thorough
assessment.
Question Assesses
Content Area II—Assessment, Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning;
Biopsychosocial History and Collateral Data (Competency); The
Components of a Biopsychosocial Assessment (KSA)
4
270
.
A. In most cases, clients recognize that there is a problem
interfering with enjoyment (or partner enjoyment) of a sexual
relationship. Social workers then begin with complete histories of
symptoms and referrals for physical exams. Diagnostic tests are
used to rule out any medical problems that may be contributing to
the dysfunction, if needed. Understanding attitudes about sex, as
well as other possible contributing factors (fear, anxiety, past sexual
trauma/abuse, relationship concerns, medications, alcohol or drug
abuse, etc.) will help the social worker understand the underlying
cause of the problem and make recommendations for appropriate
treatment. Sexual dysfunction is not going to be typically identified
through medical screenings or social work assessments. Social
workers will usually learn about these issues through client self-
reports.
Question Assesses
Content Area II—Assessment, Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning;
Biopsychosocial History and Collateral Data (Competency); The
Indicators of Sexual Dysfunction (KSA)
5. A. In general, it is recommended that sensitive questions be placed
399
in the latter part of a social work interview to allow rapport to develop
between the client and social worker. Reiterating that information is
kept confidential is helpful but bringing up the “limits to confidentiality”
can make clients more reluctant to answer. Information is never
collected anonymously, only confidentially, in interviews as the
identity of respondents is known.
Question Assesses
Content Area II—Assessment, Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning;
Biopsychosocial History and Collateral Data (Competency);
Methods to Obtain Sensitive Information (e.g., Substance Abuse,
Sexual Abuse) (KSA)
6. B. All the response choices could be indicators of resistance
Indicators of resistance can also include engaging in intellectual talk
by using technical terms or abstract concepts, asking questions of a
social worker that are not related to presenting issues or problems,
being preoccupied with past events instead of current issues, false
promising, and/or flattering a social worker in an attempt to “soften”
the social worker so as not to be pushed. While speaking about
irrelevant topic and arriving late may be resistant behaviors, they also
can be due to a lack of clarity of the problem-solving process
Limiting the amount of sensitive information is a more salient
indicator of resistance than the other response choices provided.
Question Assesses
Content Area II—Assessment, Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning;
Assessment and Diagnosis (Competency); The Indicators of
Motivation, Resistance and Readiness to Change (KSA)
7. B. The social worker must view the unemployment “using a systems
approach.” Although the job loss is causing financial concerns, it
would also have an impact on other aspects of the client’s life, such
as his physical and mental health. Systems theory indicates that a
change to one part of a client’s life will impact on others.
Question Assesses
Content Area II—Assessment, Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning;
Assessment and Diagnosis (Competency); Biopsychosocial
400
Factors Related to Mental Health (KSA)
8
272
.
B. Dexedrine, like Adderall and Ritalin, is a stimulant that is used
for the treatment of attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. Tofranil
and Elavil are antidepressants and are used primarily to treat
depressive disorders. However, these medications are also used at
times for the treatment of anxiety disorders.
Question Assesses
Content Area II—Assessment, Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning;
Assessment and Diagnosis (Competency); Common Psychotropic
and Nonpsychotropic Prescriptions and Over-the-Counter
Medications and Their Side Effects (KSA)
9. A. Since the Tarasoff case in 1974, duty to warn has become an
important concept in social work. Being able to protect potentia
victims from harm and protecting clients from self-harm are ethica
obligations. Duty to warn means that social workers must verbally tel
authorities and/or intended victims that there is a foreseeable danger
of violence. In addition, social workers have a duty to protect, so
social workers who determine that their clients present a serious
danger of violence to others have an obligation to use reasonable
care to protect the intended victims against danger. This may entai
police notification or other necessary steps.
Question Assesses
Content Area II—Assessment, Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning;
Assessment and Diagnosis (Competency); Risk Assessment
Methods (KSA)
10. A. Those with high ego strength approach problems with a sense
that they can overcome problems and even grow as a result. They
try to find new ways to cope with struggles and handle challenges
without losing their sense of self. On the contrary, those with low
ego strength view challenges as something to avoid. While wishfu
thinking or fantasies can be a form of avoidance, they are not the
most salient indicators of low ego strength. Those with low ego
401
strength often cannot find new ways to cope with struggles as
reality seems overwhelming.
Question Assesses
Content Area II—Assessment, Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning;
Assessment and Diagnosis (Competency); Methods to Assess Ego
Strengths (KSA)
11. A. Personality disorders make it hard to function in everyday life as
they distort thinking. People with personality disorders find it hard to
change their behavior or adapt to different situations. Those with
personality disorders have little insight into their maladaptive
behaviors.
Question Assesses
Content Area II—Assessment, Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning;
Assessment and Diagnosis (Competency); The Use of the
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of the American Psychiatric
Association (KSA)
1
274
2
.
A. Clients who receive their antipsychotic medications via injection
are more likely to continue their medications than those who take
them orally. Since injectable medications are usually only needed
once or twice per month, it may be easier to remember these
appointments than taking pills several times a day. This
consistency in medication compliance may result in fewer
hospitalizations and few symptom relapses. The cost of the
medications is not a therapeutic consideration. While injectable
medications can be used in addition to oral administration, there is
no therapeutic advantage stated.
Question Assesses
Content Area II—Assessment, Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning;
Assessment and Diagnosis (Competency); Common Psychotropic
and Nonpsychotropic Prescriptions and Over-the-Counter
Medications and Their Side Effects (KSA)
402
13. A. Clients with borderline personality disorder tend to view the
world in black-and-white, all-or-nothing, dichotomous thinking
These polarized thoughts lead to intense emotional reactions that
are unable to be regulated. Clients with borderline personality
disorder often engage in self-destructive behavior and act
impulsively. Clients with this diagnosis often have little control over
their behavior. While thought patterns are fixed, they are not always
delusional.
Question Assesses
Content Area II—Assessment, Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning;
Assessment and Diagnosis (Competency); The Use of the
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of the American Psychiatric
Association (KSA)
14. C. Risk factors are associated with an increased likelihood that a
client or community will be affected by, or become a perpetrator of,
violence. Risk factors can occur at the individual, family, school, and
community levels. Not everyone who is identified as being “at risk”
becomes involved in violence.
Question Assesses
Content Area II—Assessment, Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning;
Assessment and Diagnosis (Competency); The Indicators and Risk
Factors of the Client’s/Client System’s Danger to Self and Others
(KSA)
15. C. Paxil and Zoloft are both selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors
(SSRIs) for the treatment of depression. Although the client may
have other diagnoses, she is likely diagnosed with major depressive
disorder, which would require the use of an antidepressant.
Question Assesses
Content Area II—Assessment, Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning;
Assessment and Diagnosis (Competency); Common Psychotropic
and Nonpsychotropic Prescriptions and Over-the-Counter
Medications and Their Side Effects (KSA)
403
1
276
6
.
A. Conduct disorder is repetitive and persistent pattern of behavior
in which the basic rights of others or major age-appropriate societal
norms or rules are violated, as manifested by the presence of three
(or more) criteria in the past 12 months, with at least one criterion
present in the past 6 months. Although conduct disorder can be
diagnosed in adults, symptoms usually already emerge in
childhood or adolescence, though they do not need to be
present before age 12.
Question Assesses
Content Area II—Assessment, Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning;
Assessment and Diagnosis (Competency); The Use of the
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of the American Psychiatric
Association (KSA)
17. B. The World Health Organization Disability Assessment Schedule
(WHODAS) is recommended as a tool to determine functioning and
level of disability. The Global Assessment of Functioning Scale
(GAF), which provided a numeric rating as an indicator of a client’s
well-being, has been eliminated from the DSM. The Thematic
Apperception Test, or TAT, is a type of projective test that involves
describing ambiguous scenes to learn more about a person’s
emotions, motivations, and personality.
Question Assesses
Content Area II—Assessment, Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning;
Assessment and Diagnosis (Competency); The Use of the
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of the American Psychiatric
Association (KSA)
18. C. Legal involvement is not a diagnostic criterion of the substance-
related and addictive disorders as there are many factors that are
strongly associated with being arrested or coming into contact with
legal authorities.
404
Question Assesses
Content Area II—Assessment, Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning;
Assessment and Diagnosis (Competency); The Use of the
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of the American Psychiatric
Association (KSA)
19. A. A mental status examination is a structured way of observing
and describing a client’s current state of mind, under the domains of
appearance, attitude, behavior, mood and affect, speech, thought
processes, thought content, perception, cognition, insight, and
judgment. It is not a psychiatric evaluation aimed at diagnosing
disorders. Many disorders or conditions cause delirium, such as
alcohol/drug abuse or withdrawal and infections. Delirium involves a
quick change between mental states (e.g., from lethargy to agitation
and back to lethargy). Symptoms that can be detected by a menta
status examination include changes in alertness (usually more alert
in the morning, less alert at night), awareness, orientation to time or
place, memory, recall, and mood (personality changes).
Question Assesses
Content Area II—Assessment, Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning;
Assessment and Diagnosis (Competency); The Components and
Function of the Mental Status Examination (KSA)
2
278
0
.
B. In social work, triangulation indicates that multiple sources or
methods are used to gather information and/or check results. A
social worker may be more confident that the social worker has the
information needed or is accurate with conclusions drawn if
different sources/methods lead to the same result. By using
multiple sources or methods, a social worker can hope to
overcome the weakness or intrinsic biases and the problems that
come from a single source or method.
Question Assesses
Content Area II—Assessment, Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning;
Assessment and Diagnosis (Competency); Methods of Involving
405
Clients/Client Systems in Problem Identification (e.g., Gathering
Collateral Information) (KSA)
21. A. Tardive dyskinesia is a neurological disorder of involuntary
movements caused by long-term use of antipsychotic drugs. These
medications may be used to treat schizophrenia spectrum and other
psychotic disorders. Symptoms include tongue protrusion,
grimacing, lip smacking, or other involuntary movements of the
head, face, neck, and tongue muscles.
Question Assesses
Content Area II—Assessment, Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning;
Assessment and Diagnosis (Competency); Common Psychotropic
and Nonpsychotropic Prescriptions and Over-the-Counter
Medications and Their Side Effects (KSA)
22. B. Nardil is a monoamine oxidase inhibitor (MAOI), and there are
dietary restrictions of foods that contain high levels of tyramine
(generally food that has been aged), including cheeses, cured
meats, and yeast extract spreads.
Question Assesses
Content Area II—Assessment, Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning;
Assessment and Diagnosis (Competency); Common Psychotropic
and Nonpsychotropic Prescriptions and Over-the-Counter
Medications and Their Side Effects (KSA)
23. A. Serotonin is a chemical created by the human body that works
as a neurotransmitter. It is responsible for maintaining mood
balance. An association is made between serotonin and
depression. It is unclear if decreased levels of serotonin contribute
to depression or depression causes a decrease in serotonin levels
Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) are a classification
of antidepressants.
Question Assesses
Content Area II—Assessment, Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning;
Assessment and Diagnosis (Competency); Basic Medical
Terminology (KSA)
406
2
280
4
.
C. Evaluation methods can be classified as either qualitative or
quantitative. In qualitative evaluations, data are collected through
observations and/or interviews. Findings are generated via
identification of themes in the language used and content
contained in the communication observed or generated. The focus
groups employed by the social worker are qualitative in nature.
Contrarily, quantitative evaluations are conducted by making
numerical comparisons and statistical inferences. The social
worker’s comparison of the number of clients rehospitalized versus
the number who were not is a quantitative approach. Since both
qualitative and quantitative methods are being used, the social
worker is using a mixed method approach to evaluation.
Question Assesses
Content Area II—Assessment, Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning;
Assessment and Diagnosis (Competency); Data Collection and
Analysis Methods (KSA)
25. C. Protective factors are attributes that are associated with not
engaging in dangerous behaviors. They are the opposite of risk
factors. All of the response choices are associated with an
increased likelihood of engaging in violence except the provision of
physical and behavioral care, which is a protective factor.
Question Assesses
Content Area II—Assessment, Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning;
Assessment and Diagnosis (Competency); The Indicators and Risk
Factors of the Client’s/Client System’s Danger to Self and Others
(KSA)
26. A. Hodgkin’s disease is a type of lymphoma, a cancer of the
lymphatic system. The first sign of Hodgkin’s disease is often an
enlarged lymph node. The disease can spread to nearby lymph
nodes. Later, it may spread to the lungs, liver, or bone marrow. The
exact cause is unknown.
Question Assesses
407
Content Area II—Assessment, Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning;
Assessment and Diagnosis (Competency); Basic Medical
Terminology (KSA)
27. B. Case records are often an excellent source of information for
evaluating the impacts of services. However, there are a few
limitations. All the response choices are potential issues but only
one is a consistent constraint. If looking at records completed by
multiple workers, there may be inconsistencies in recording styles
or detail that may impact on evaluations, but such inconsistencies
and omissions do not have to occur. Client’s views on service
delivery may be noted in case records. The most important
consideration is that records and evaluations would need to be
limited to only information that is explicitly stated, which may not
reflect all progress that has been made or the outcomes that need
to be studied.
Question Assesses
Content Area II—Assessment, Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning;
Assessment and Diagnosis (Competency); Methods to Assess
Organizational Functioning (e.g., Agency Assessments) (KSA)
2
282
8
.
B. Cluster B includes the personality disorders that are
characterized by dramatic, emotional, and erratic behavior. It
includes borderline personality disorder, narcissistic personality
disorder, histrionic personality disorder, and antisocial personality
disorder. Schizoid personality disorder is in Cluster A (odd and
eccentric behavior) and obsessive-compulsive personality disorder
is in Cluster C (anxious and fearful behavior).
Question Assesses
Content Area II—Assessment, Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning;
Assessment and Diagnosis (Competency); The Use of the
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of the American Psychiatric
Association (KSA)
408
29. A. Agranulocytosis is a lowering of the white blood cell count that
requires monitoring via bloodwork. A large number of drugs have
been associated with agranulocytosis, including antiseizure,
antibiotic, and antipsychotic medications, such as Clozaril. Al
clients receiving Clozaril must get baseline bloodwork and be
enrolled in the Clozaril National Registry, which records adverse
impacts from taking Clozaril and bloodwork results.
Question Assesses
Content Area II—Assessment, Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning;
Assessment and Diagnosis (Competency); Common Psychotropic
and Nonpsychotropic Prescriptions and Over-the-Counter
Medications and Their Side Effects (KSA)
30. A. The essential features of a personality disorders are
impairments in personality (self and interpersonal) functioning and
the presence of pathological personality traits. To diagnose
borderline personality disorder, there has to be significant
impairments in personality and interpersonal functioning.
Personality deficits may be manifested by unstable self-image,
chronic feelings of emptiness, dissociative states under stress,
and/or instability in goals. Deficits in interpersonal functioning may
be manifested by an inability to recognize the feelings of others
intense, unstable, and conflicted close relationships; and/or
alternating between overinvolvement and withdrawal.
Question Assesses
Content Area II—Assessment, Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning;
Assessment and Diagnosis (Competency); The Use of the
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of the American Psychiatric
Association (KSA)
3
284
1
.
A. Behavior change is best understood as a process with different
stages of readiness. For most clients, behavior change occurs
gradually over time, with a client progressing from being
uninterested, unaware, or unwilling to make a change
409
(precontemplation), to considering a change (contemplation), to
deciding and preparing to make a change (preparation). This is
followed by definitive action and attempts to maintain the new
behavior over time (maintenance).
Contemplation is the first time that there is some movement toward
change because a client, while ambivalent about changing, may weigh
the benefits versus costs (i.e., time, expense, and effort) of change. The
client is willing to examine what his life would be like if change occurred
which is characteristic of contemplation.
Question Assesses
Content Area II—Assessment, Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning;
Assessment and Diagnosis (Competency); Methods to Assess
Motivation, Resistance, and Readiness to Change (KSA)
32. C. Cultural awareness involves working in conjunction with natural
informal support and helping networks (i.e., neighborhoods
coworkers, churches, spiritual leaders, and healers). The coworker
is probably a member of the client’s support network and can be
useful in the problem-solving process. It is the client’s decision of
whether information can be shared. The social worker should use
the coworker as a valuable source of information about the problem
as the coworker is a collateral source. There is nothing that
precludes the coworker from sitting in on the session and the
coworker does not need to complete all intake paperwork.
Question Assesses
Content Area II—Assessment, Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning;
Assessment and Diagnosis (Competency); Methods of Involving
Clients/Client Systems in Problem Identification (e.g., Gathering
Collateral Information) (KSA)
3
286
3
.
A. Ego strength is the ability of the ego to effectively deal with the
demands of the id, the superego, and reality. It is a basis for
resilience and helps maintain emotional stability by coping with
internal and external stress.
410
Indicators of ego strength include clients:
■ Using painful events to strengthen themselves
■ Taking responsibility for actions
■ Holding themselves accountable
■ Accepting themselves with their limitations
Blaming others is not an indicator of ego strength. Ego strength
allows individuals to feel more in control of their emotions, responses,
decisions, and future path, thereby helping people to better manage
internal and external stress, work toward their goals, and remain calm
during conflict or anxiety-provoking situations. However, regulating mood
“swings” is not the best response choice as individuals with ego strength
are less likely to have such swings.
Question Assesses
Content Area II—Assessment, Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning;
Assessment and Diagnosis (Competency); Methods to Assess Ego
Strengths (KSA)
34. C. Transvestic disorder identifies people who are sexually aroused
by dressing as the opposite sex, but who experience significant
distress or impairment in their lives, socially or occupationally,
because of their behavior. The disorder can be diagnosed in women
or men who have this sexual interest.
Question Assesses
Content Area II—Assessment, Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning;
Assessment and Diagnosis (Competency); The Use of the
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of the American Psychiatric
Association (KSA)
35. A. Like other illnesses, substance misuse worsens over time. The
substance use disorder criteria explained in the DSM allow socia
workers to determine how severe a substance use disorder has
become depending on how many symptoms are present. Lega
involvement is not a diagnostic criterion and using substances in
411
risky settings that put an individual or others in danger is not
required.
Question Assesses
Content Area II—Assessment, Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning;
Assessment and Diagnosis (Competency); The Use of the
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of the American Psychiatric
Association (KSA)
3
288
6
.
A. Despite the client’s report that she will not act on her thoughts,
she is at risk because she has these feelings. The vignette does
not describe the social worker taking any action yet. A safety
assessment will determine the severity of the depression and
whether she is at risk for a suicide attempt. It must be done FIRST
before any other action is taken.
Question Assesses
Content Area II—Assessment, Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning;
Assessment and Diagnosis (Competency); The Indicators and Risk
Factors of the Client’s/Client System’s Danger to Self and Others
(KSA)
37. A. Folie à deux is very rare and describes when identical or similar
psychiatric disorders affect two or more people, who usually have a
close relationship. Often these disorders involve delusions,
especially those that are paranoid.
Question Assesses
Content Area II—Assessment, Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning;
Assessment and Diagnosis (Competency); The Indicators of
Mental and Emotional Illness Throughout the Lifespan (KSA)
38. C. The term “intellectual developmental disorder” is used to clarify
the disorder’s relationship with the World Health Organization’s
International Classification of Diseases classification system, which
uses the term “disorders of intellectual development.” Intellectua
412
disability is placed in parentheses given its continued use but is not
the best diagnosis. Mental retardation has been discontinued with
strong advocacy to eliminate the “R” word and stigma that those
with intellectual challenges are “less than.”
Question Assesses
Content Area II—Assessment, Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning;
Assessment and Diagnosis (Competency); The Use of the
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of the American Psychiatric
Association (KSA)
39. B. Caffeine use disorder, along with attenuated psychosis
syndrome, depressive episodes with short-duration hypomania,
internet gaming disorder, neurobehavioral disorder associated with
prenatal alcohol exposure, suicidal behavior disorder, and
nonsuicidal self-injury, are listed in the DSM as conditions for further
study.
Question Assesses
Content Area II—Assessment, Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning;
Assessment and Diagnosis (Competency); The Use of the
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of the American Psychiatric
Association (KSA)
4
290
0
.
B. A delusion is a false or erroneous belief that usually involves a
misinterpretation of perceptions or experiences. A delusion is a
belief that is held despite evidence to the contrary. A hallucination
involves the senses. An auditory hallucination—hearing something
that is not said—is the most common type. In this vignette, the
client had a false, fixed belief despite a lack of supporting evidence,
but there was no indication that it resulted from seeing or hearing
anything that would support these beliefs. Hypomania is a condition
characterized by a period of abnormally elevated, extreme changes
in mood or emotions, energy level or activity level. Hypomania
does not have to include delusional thoughts.
Question Assesses
413
Content Area II—Assessment, Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning;
Assessment and Diagnosis (Competency); The Indicators of
Mental and Emotional Illness Throughout the Lifespan (KSA)
41. A. The client’s behavior is consistent with bipolar disorder. He was
depressed upon admission and then appeared to be manic during
the hospitalization. Only lithium, out of those medications listed, is a
mood stabilizer. Ativan is an antianxiety agent and haldol is an
antipsychotic medication.
Question Assesses
Content Area II—Assessment, Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning;
Assessment and Diagnosis (Competency); Common Psychotropic
and Nonpsychotropic Prescriptions and Over-the-Counter
Medications and Their Side Effects (KSA)
42. C. Persistent depressive disorder requires that a depressed mood
occur for most of the day, for more days than not, and for at least 2
years in adults (at least 1 year for children and adolescents).
Question Assesses
Content Area II—Assessment, Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning;
Assessment and Diagnosis (Competency); The Use of the
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of the American Psychiatric
Association (KSA)
43. C. Many children can make decisions about their gender identity
Based on the current understanding of gender dysphoria, the period
before an individual reaches puberty is critical. Thus, children can
be diagnosed with gender dysphoria. Sexual orientation, by
definition, is not the same as gender identity. Gender identity is
defined as the particular gender an individual associates or does
not associate with (e.g., female, male, an alternative gender or lack
thereof) versus sexual orientation, which is defined as a genera
pattern of attraction and sexual arousal to other people (or lack
thereof). Gender dysphoria must be differentiated from body
dysmorphic disorder in which persons fixate on perceived flaws in
their appearance. Those with gender dysphoria may strongly wish
414
for the physical features of the gender they gravitate towards but
not because they are fixated on flaws.
Question Assesses
Content Area II—Assessment, Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning;
Assessment and Diagnosis (Competency); The Use of the
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of the American Psychiatric
Association (KSA)
4
292
4
.
B. The NASW Code of Ethics states that it is unethical to continue
to treat clients when services are no longer needed. The waiving of
cost associated for this treatment is not relevant. Continuing to see
the client with no treatment goals is not in the client’s best interest.
The social worker should have addressed the client’s apprehension
and nervousness about termination. Central to the termination
process is working with the client to anticipate future needs and
how to address them. Continuing to see him “just in case” does not
assist the client to be autonomous and to practice, on his own,
coping skills that he has attained during treatment.
Question Assesses
Content Area II—Assessment, Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning;
Treatment Planning (Competency); Discharge, Aftercare, and
Follow-Up Planning (KSA)
45. A. Program evaluation usually relies on both subjective and
objective data. The “facts” or objective outcomes include days
incarcerated, number of subsequent hospitalizations, and so forth
Subjective information, such as how the “facts” are perceived by
clients through descriptions of their feelings, experiences, and
perceptions, is equally important. Subjective outcomes often
provide valuable information about how the service experience was
viewed by those served. The satisfaction of foster parents and
perceived safety of children are subjective, not objective, outcomes
of a foster care program. The number of children reunified is the
only objective outcome in the response choices provided.
415
Question Assesses
Content Area II—Assessment, Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning;
Treatment Planning (Competency); The Principles and Features of
Objective and Subjective Data (KSA)
46. B. Social work interventions or treatments must be selected based
upon the biopsychosocial–spiritual–cultural assessments of clients,
which include the strengths that they possess, as well as the
identification of feasible and desired outcomes within larger service
contexts. Many interventions or treatments are not paid for by third
parties and each intervention must be individualized so the
treatment does not need to be used with others.
Question Assesses
Content Area II—Assessment, Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning;
Treatment Planning (Competency); The Criteria Used in the
Selection of Intervention/Treatment Modalities (e.g., Client/Client
System Abilities, Culture, and Life Stage) (KSA)
47. B. SOAP stands for subjective, objective, assessment, and plan. In
the subjective and objective sections, a client’s subjective and
objective well-being are reported by the social worker. In the
assessment section, a social worker pulls together these subjective
and objective findings and consolidates them into a short
assessment. A plan is then made based upon the assessment. The
SOAP format is most often used in healthcare settings.
Question Assesses
Content Area II—Assessment, Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning;
Treatment Planning (Competency); The Principles and Features of
Objective and Subjective Data (KSA)
4
294
8
.
B. There are four different ways to assess reliability or consistency.
Interrater reliability uses different independent raters/observers to
see if there are consistent estimates of the behavior. Alternative or
416
parallel forms use two means of data collection constructed in the
same way to see if they yield the same result. Test–retest reliability
determines if assessments fluctuate from one time to another.
Internal consistency looks at measurements within a test or
assessment to see if they yield comparable results. Only interrater
requires two or more independent staff to record the data.
Question Assesses
Content Area II—Assessment, Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning;
Treatment Planning (Competency); Methods to Assess Reliability
and Validity in Social Work Research (KSA)
49. C. External validity is concerned with the ability to generalize the
results. The director agency is worried about the effectiveness of
the program with adults versus children.
Question Assesses
Content Area II—Assessment, Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning;
Treatment Planning (Competency); Methods to Assess Reliability
and Validity in Social Work Research (KSA)
50. C. The client and social worker are in the planning stage of the
problem-solving process. Planning comes after engagement and
assessment. Providing strategies is an intervention. Gathering
information is an assessment but the question states that the
assessment has been completed. The social worker must clarify
with the client the desired outcomes and what is meant by “being
more assertive.” Clearly defining the problem and how it relates to
positive and negative aspects of the client’s life will assist in the
formation of an appropriate intervention, treatment, or service plan.
Question Assesses
Content Area II—Assessment, Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning;
Treatment Planning (Competency); Methods to Involve
Clients/Client Systems in Intervention Planning (KSA)
51. B. The daughter’s behavior is egocentric, and she has trouble
seeing the viewpoint of others. This behavior is typical of children in
the preoperational stage of cognition. Because others do not see
417
her actions as problematic, it is likely that the mother has an
unrealistic expectation that can be helped by understanding child
development. The mother needs education about child
development.
Question Assesses
Content Area II—Assessment, Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning;
Treatment Planning (Competency); The Criteria Used in the
Selection of Intervention/Treatment Modalities (e.g., Client/Client
System Abilities, Culture, and Life Stage) (KSA)
295
296
418
297
Content Area III:
Psychotherapy, Clinical
Interventions, and Case
Management (27%)298
419
CHAPTER299
7
Therapeutic Relationship
THE COMPONENTS OF THE SOCIAL WORKER–
CLIENT/CLIENT SYSTEM RELATIONSHIP
A social worker–client relationship is an emotional or connecting bond.
The relationship is the communication bridge whereby messages pass
over the bridge with greater or lesser difficulty, depending on the nature
of the emotional connection or alliance.
A positive relationship is an important tool of helping. Social
workers must create a warm, accepting, trustworthy, and dependable
relationship with clients.
In working with a client, a social worker must convey a sense of
respect for a client’s individuality, as well as the client’s right and
capacity for self-determination and for being fully involved in the
helping process from beginning to end.
The most consistent factor associated with beneficial outcomes of a
helping relationship is a positive relationship between a social worker
and a client, but other factors, such as a social worker’s competence
and the motivation and involvement of a client, are also influential.
THE PRINCIPLES AND TECHNIQUES FOR BUILDING AND
MAINTAINING A HELPING RELATIONSHIP
Helping is based on acceptance of a client’s situation and the ability of
the client to make changes only if desired. In a helping relationship, a
social worker is trying to constructively assist a client—that is, to have
an impact on or to influence thinking and acting. The influence is further
420
presumed to be in the direction of increasing the autonomy,
understanding, effectiveness, and skill of a client.
Helping is distinguished from the more common concepts of advice
giving, reprimanding, or punishing. These often involve threats and
seldom result in more than outward conformity or superficial change.
They generally do not increase strength or willingness and ability to
carry responsibility.
The core of the helping process is the relationship between a social
worker and a client.
The relationship between a social worker and a client is expressed
through interaction. This interaction is commonly thought of in terms of
verbal communication, which is natural, because the greater part of
300
treatment consists of talking. However, nonverbal behavior is also
very important. Body posture, gestures, facial expressions, eye
movements, and other reactions often express feelings and attitudes
more clearly than do spoken words. It is often for these reasons that a
social worker must be aware of personal feelings, attitudes, and
responses, as well as those of a client if the social worker is to
understand what is taking place and be of assistance.
A social worker cannot be useful in helping others unless the social
worker understands and is willing to accept the difficulties that all
human beings encounter in trying to meet their needs. A social worker
must know that the potential for all the weaknesses and strengths
known to humanity exists at some level in every person. Social workers
must also understand that human beings become more capable of
dealing with their problems as they feel more adequate. Social workers
recognize positive, as well as negative, aspects of a client, which will
influence efforts to change and successful achievement of goals.
The interaction between a social worker and a client that takes
place about a problem involves and is affected by the relationship
between the two persons. Human beings act in terms of their feelings,
attitudes, and understandings; hence, these must be taken into account
and explored if the helping process is to result in change. Both a social
worker and a client have objectives; a social worker’s perceived
objective is to be of assistance. Clarification and definition of these
objectives often become important parts of the helping process. Both a
social worker and a client have a degree of power (i.e., ability to
influence the situation and the results).
421
The therapeutic process calls for several basic conditions.
There must be trust with a social worker. Unless this condition
exists, facts will be withheld and there will be no real exploration of
problems. Trust grows as clients talk about themselves and their
circumstances, revealing things they do not ordinarily disclose, and
discovering that social workers do not condemn them. Trust does not
come quickly.
There must be recognition that the therapeutic process is a joint
exploration. Both a social worker and client must be willing to examine
problems, attitudes, and feelings.
There must be listening on both sides. However, a social worker
must listen more than a client does. There is no movement when a
social worker is doing all the talking and a client listens passively. A
social worker must behave in a manner that makes it easier for a client
to speak freely by listening attentively, by accepting what is said in a
nonjudgmental manner, and by giving occasional support or
encouragement.
A social worker may be encouraging by simply repeating reflectively
or paraphrasing what a client has said. A social worker may, without
other comment, say, “Tell me more” or show acceptance when a client
reveals ideas, attitudes, or behaviors that are generally viewed
unfavorably. A social worker may also point out that other persons also
have such attitudes or make similar mistakes. By assisting a client to
speak more freely, a social worker not only furthers mutual exploration
of the problem, but also frees a client of anxieties that stand in the way
of readiness to accept suggestions. A social worker is also obligated to
respect the confidence a client has placed in the social worker and to
refrain from sharing the information with others.
Process of Engagement in Social Work Practice
The beginning of the problem-solving process includes activities of a
social worker and a client to be helped that are directed at (a)
becoming engaged with each other (engagement), (b) assessing a
301
client’s situation in order to select appropriate goals and the means
of attaining them (assessment), and (c) planning how to employ these
means (planning). During engagement, the limits to confidentiality must
be explicitly stated at the beginning of this stage. Social workers must
422
also explain their roles and how they can assist clients in addressing
their problems.
It is important to consider how a client feels about coming for help
and to deal with any negative feelings a client may feel (particularly if a
client is involuntarily seeking help). A social worker must be open to
discussing these feelings openly, because very little in a client can be
changed until negative feelings are addressed. If a social worker is
empathic with a client, it may be possible to find a common ground
between what a client wishes and what a social worker can legitimately
do.
A social worker and a client establish a therapeutic alliance in which
they view themselves as allies in the helping process. A working
alliance or a willingness by a client to work with a social worker should
be established. A working alliance is sometimes referred to as a
treatment alliance.
A social worker should express hopefulness that change can occur.
Resistance may occur during this stage. If clients are resistant to
engage, social workers should clarify the process or specify what will
happen and discuss this ambivalence.
THE DYNAMICS OF POWER AND TRANSPARENCY IN THE
SOCIAL WORKER–CLIENT/CLIENT SYSTEM
RELATIONSHIP
Social workers have power and privileges associated with their roles,
titles, and education. Being conscious of these privileges is critical
because there is a responsibility to challenge hierarchical assumptions
and power dynamics inherent in social worker–client relationships.
Social workers should use egalitarian and collaborative approaches
that give clients choices, decision-making power, and opportunities for
honest feedback.
If social workers are transparent and honest about their positions of
privilege, they help to undercut the power differentials. Transparency
about the process and intent of social work interventions is essential.
Role expectations should be discussed and power differences should
be acknowledged.
Transparency and power are linked. If clients are not informed
about what is going to occur in each stage of the problem-solving
423
process and do not understand the theoretical models which help
explain their situations, they cannot be full participants in the change
process. Thus, transparency or the provision of all available information
is the underpinning of the therapeutic relationship. If social workers
deliberately withhold observations or knowledge from clients, they are
reinforcing the power differential which inherently exists and
disempowering clients. This is not helpful to clients or in accordance
with the values of social work practice.
THE SOCIAL WORKER’S ROLE IN THE PROBLEM-
SOLVING PROCESS
Social worker roles in the problem-solving process include consultant,
advocate, case manager, catalyst, broker, mediator, facilitator,
instructor, mobilizer, resource allocator, and so on.
Key social work practice roles include the following.
Advocate
302
In the advocate role, social workers champion the rights of others with
the goal of empowering the client system being served. Social workers
speak on behalf of clients when others will not listen or when clients are
unable to do so. Social workers have a particular responsibility to
advocate on behalf of those disempowered by society.
Broker
In the role of broker, social workers are responsible for identifying,
locating, and linking client systems to needed resources in a timely
fashion. Once client needs are assessed and potential services
identified, the broker assists in choosing the most appropriate service
option and assists in negotiating the terms of service delivery. Social
workers are concerned with the quality, quantity, and accessibility of
services.
Change Agent
A change agent participates as part of a group or organization seeking
to improve or restructure some aspect of service provision. A change
424
agent, working with others, uses the problem-solving model to identify
the problem, solicit input, and plan for change. A change agent acts in
a coordinated manner to achieve planned change at multiple levels that
helps to shift the focus of institutional resources to meet identified
goals.
Counselor
The role of the counselor focuses on improving social functioning.
Social workers help client systems articulate their needs, clarify their
problems, explore resolution strategies, and apply intervention
strategies to develop and expand the capacities of client systems to
deal with problems more effectively. A key function of this role is to
empower clients by affirming their personal strengths and their
capacities to deal with problems more effectively.
Mediator
When dispute resolution is needed in order to accomplish goals, social
workers will carry out the role of mediator. Social workers intervene in
disputes between parties to help them find compromises, reconcile
differences, and reach mutually satisfying agreements. The mediator
takes a neutral stance among the involved parties.
The primary role of social workers is to act as a resource—
assuming various roles depending upon the nature of client problems.
METHODS TO CLARIFY THE ROLES AND
RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE SOCIAL WORKER AND
CLIENT/CLIENT SYSTEM IN THE INTERVENTION
PROCESS
303
A social worker can be supportive in these roles, but is not supposed to
be the client’s support system. Instead, a social worker should assist
the client to mobilize or build natural supports. People generally like to
give advice. It gives them the feeling of being competent and important.
Hence, social workers may easily fall into this inappropriate role without
taking into account the abilities, the fears, and the interests of clients
and/or their circumstances.
425
Social workers should also not be insensitive to clients’ resistance.
When a client does not claim any difficulties, is unable or refuses to
talk, explains that it is someone else’s fault, and/or denies what has
happened, a social worker may try to argue or in other ways exert
pressure. This response tends to increase a client’s resistance. This
approach does nothing for a client.
A social worker may also confuse the situation and hinder
clarification of the problem. In an effort to establish a relationship, a
social worker may overpraise or fail to confront a client. Clients must
look at their own roles in situations and recognize their own limitations.
THE CONCEPT OF ACCEPTANCE AND EMPATHY IN THE
SOCIAL WORKER–CLIENT/CLIENT SYSTEM
RELATIONSHIP
Empathic understanding involves being nonjudgmental, accepting, and
genuine.
Empathic Communication
■ Establishes rapport with clients—empathic communication is on
means of bridging the gap between a social worker and client.
■ Starts where a client is and stays attuned to a client throughout th
encounter (being perceptive to changes in frame of mind).
■ Increases the level at which clients explore themselves and the
problems.
■ Responds to a client’s nonverbal messages (a social worker ca
observe body language and make explicit a client’s feelings).
■ Decreases defensiveness and engages a client in processing an
testing new information.
■ Defuses anger that represents obstacles to progress.
Empathic responding encourages more rational discussion and sets
the stage for problem solving. For those clients who have learned to
cope with feelings of helplessness and frustration by becoming angry
426
and/or violent, an empathic response may be the first step in engaging
in helping relationships.
THE DYNAMICS OF DIVERSITY IN THE SOCIAL
WORKER–CLIENT/ CLIENT SYSTEM RELATIONSHIP
304
A social worker’s self-awareness about personal attitudes, values, and
beliefs about cultural differences and a willingness to acknowledge
cultural differences are critical factors in working with diverse
populations. A social worker is responsible for bringing up and
addressing issues of cultural difference with a client and is also
ethically responsible for being culturally competent by obtaining the
appropriate knowledge, skills, and experience.
Social workers should:
1. Move from being culturally unaware to being aware of their ow
heritage and the heritage of others.
2. Value and celebrate differences of others rather than maintaining a
ethnocentric stance.
3. Have an awareness of personal values and biases and how the
may influence relationships with clients.
4. Demonstrate comfort with racial and cultural differences betwee
themselves and clients.
5. Have an awareness of personal and professional limitations.
6. Acknowledge their own racial attitudes, beliefs, and feelings.
Although experiences will differ, many individuals have experienced
racism, oppression, or discrimination in some form and are very
sensitive to being treated with disrespect or to being exploited. They
will be skeptical and cautious about seeking help for fear of being
mistreated or misunderstood.
Trust is an important element in establishing a therapeutic alliance.
Clients want to know if a social worker can be trusted and is competent
to help them solve their problems. Clients regard and treat social
workers as experts and authority figures.
427
Matching clients and social workers of the same race
and ethnicity may decrease dropout rates and increase
utilization of services, but the quality of the therapeutic
relationship remains the most important factor in
predicting the outcome of treatment.
Clients will ascribe credibility to a social worker using their cultural
norms as a reference point (i.e., role, age, education, gender).
Understanding the cultural heritage of a client is important. Conflict
between older and younger generations is often a common occurrence.
Younger members assume the values and traditions of the majority,
which can conflict with the more traditional values of the original culture
that are held by an older generation.
Power and role reversals that threaten and undermine parental
authority and leadership can also occur in families as parents rely on
younger members of the family to become cultural interpreters. Role
reversals may also occur if a woman becomes the main breadwinner
because her husband cannot find employment. In a traditional marital
relationship with strict gender roles, men may have difficulty dealing
with this role reversal.
Although no culture condones child abuse or neglect, there are
cultural variations about what constitutes child abuse and neglect, as
well as acceptable disciplinary measures.
There are greater incidences of domestic violence in cultures where
women have lower statuses than men.
Cultural groups have various explanations for an illness, particularly
305
mental illness, and also have different ideas of what will help (often
depends on the identified cause of the illness).
Impact of Diversity in Styles of Communicating
Communication styles may be strongly influenced by culture, race,
and/or ethnicity.
Communication is far more than an exchange of words. Facial
expressions, hand gestures, posture, eye contact, and even silence are
constantly sending messages about attitudes, emotions, status, and
relationships.
Nonverbal cues are critical. For example, personal space or the
distance two people keep between themselves in order to feel
428
comfortable is culturally based. Personal space may be influenced by
gender or status. It can also be influenced by intimacy of a relationship.
Eye contact is also influenced by culture. For some, direct eye
contact is very brief, with the gaze then sliding away to the side,
especially with superiors or members of the opposite sex, whereas
others may engage in more direct eye contact.
Speaking volume can be nearly as important as the words
themselves. Normal baseline volumes also vary among cultures and
among individuals in these cultures.
The appropriateness of physical touch is also important to
understand. In some cultures, individuals rarely touch each other,
limiting themselves to handshakes and occasional pats on the shoulder
or arm in business relationships, or hugs in closer friendships. In other
cultures, however, physical touch, such as hugging, is part of many
interactions, even those that are casual.
Smiling, facial expressions, time, and silence are also
communication factors that vary among those from different cultures,
races, or ethnic groups.
In order to be effective with those from diverse cultural, racial,
and/or ethnic groups, social workers must:
1. Recognize direct and indirect communication styles
2. Demonstrate sensitivity to nonverbal cues
3. Generate a wide variety of verbal and nonverbal responses an
strategies
4. Use language that is culturally appropriate
5. Identify their own professional style and recognize limitations an
strengths
6. Identify and reduce barriers that will inhibit engagement w
persons who are culturally different
THE EFFECT OF THE CLIENT’S DEVELOPMENTAL LEVEL
ON THE SOCIAL WORKER–CLIENT RELATIONSHIP
429
Social workers must be sensitive to the developmental levels of clients.
Development levels refer to the functional abilities at which clients find
themselves at given moments. The problem-solving process must take
these developmental levels into account. Social workers should not rely
on chronological age as clients may be functioning at very different
developmental levels. Social workers must use engagement and
306
intervention strategies which are appropriate given clients’
developmental functioning. Assessments should include determining
the psychosocial levels of clients. Clients’ development may be delayed
or advanced across all domains or inconsistent with some areas more
behind than others. Understanding causes for discrepancies between
chronological and developmental age also may be important for insight
into clients’ problems.
THE IMPACT OF DOMESTIC, INTIMATE PARTNER, AND
OTHER VIOLENCE ON THE HELPING RELATIONSHIP
A type of trauma is that resulting from intimate partner abuse
(heterosexual, gay, lesbian, dating, married, cohabitating). The
common thread in all abusive relationships is the abuser’s need for
power and control another. Domestic violence occurs across all racial,
cultural, and socioeconomic groups and can involve physical, sexual,
psychological/emotional, and economic/financial abuse.
Signs of abuse are varied.
■ Suspicious injury (not consistent with history of injury, unusu
locations, various stages of healing, bites, repeated minor injurie
delay in seeking treatment, and old scars or new injuries fro
weapons)
■ Somatic complaints without a specific diagnosis (such as chron
pain—head, abdomen, pelvis, back, or neck)
■ Behavioral presentation (crying, minimizing, no emotion
expression, anxious or angry, defensive, fearful eye contact)
■ Controlling/coercive behavior of partner (partner hovers, ove
concerned, won’t leave client unattended, client defers to partne
fear of speaking in front of partner, or disagreeing with partner)
430
Cycle of Violence
Phase I: Tension building
Phase II: Battering incident—shortest period of the cycle, lasts a
brief time
“ Loving–contrition” (absence of tension or “honeymoon”
Phase III:
phase)—batterer offers profuse apologies; assures
attacks will never happen again and declares love and
caring
Batterers often learn abusive behavior from their families of origin,
peers, and media, as well as from personal experience of being abused
as children. Batterers view their victims as “possessions” and treat
them like objects. Victims are dehumanized to justify the battering.
Batterers are very self-centered and feel entitled to have their needs
(physical, emotional, sexual) met “no matter what.” Batterers have
control over their impulses and give themselves permission to be
abusive.
Some of the reasons that clients stay in abusive relationships are:
■ Hope that the abuser will change. If the batterer is in a treatme
program, the client hopes the behavior will change; leavin
represents a loss of the committed relationship
■Isolation and lack of support systems
307
■ Fears that no one will believe the seriousness of abuse experience
■ Abuser puts up barricades so client won’t leave the relationsh
(escalates threats of violence, threatens to kill, withholds suppo
threatens to seek custody of children, threatens suicide, etc.)
■ Dangers of leaving may pose a greater danger than remaining w
the batterer
■ Client may not have the economic resources to surviv
independently
Leaving is a process. Over time, the client comes to the conclusion
that the abuser will not change; each time the client tries to leave, the
client gathers more information that is helpful.
431
Social exchange theory is based on the idea of totaling potential
benefits and losses to determine behavior. People make decisions
about relationships based on the amount of rewards they receive from
them. A client remains in an abusive relationship because the high cost
of leaving lowers the attractiveness (outweighs the benefits) of the best
alternative. A client will leave when the best alternative promises a
better life (rewards outweigh the costs).
Guidelines for Interventions
■ According to most literature on domestic violenc
traditional marital/couples therapy is not appropriate
addressing abuse in the family. It puts victims
greater danger of further abuse.
■ Medical needs and safety are priorities. Note: Consider domes
violence in the context of Maslow’s hierarchy of needs.
■ In working with a victim of abuse, trust is a major issue
establishing a therapeutic alliance.
VERBAL AND NONVERBAL COMMUNICATION
TECHNIQUES
In order to facilitate change through the problem-solving process, a
social worker must use various verbal and nonverbal communication
techniques to assist clients to understand their behavior and feelings.
In addition, to ensure clients are honest and forthcoming during this
process, social workers must build trusting relationships with clients.
These relationships develop through effective verbal and nonverbal
communication. Social workers must be adept at using both forms of
communication successfully, as well as understanding them, because
verbal and nonverbal cues will be used by clients throughout the
problem-solving process. Insight into their meaning will produce a
higher degree of sensitivity to clients’ experiences and a deeper
understanding of their problems.
There are many verbal and nonverbal communication methods,
including:
432
■ Active listening, in which social workers are sitting up straig
and leaning toward clients in a relaxed and open manner. Attentiv
listening can involve commenting on clients’ statements, askin
open-ended questions, and making statements that show listening
occurring.
■
Silence by social workers, which can show acceptance of
308
clients’ feelings and promotes introspection or time to think about
what has been learned (very effective when used with a client
who is displaying a high degree of emotion).
■ Questioning using open- and closed-ended formats to g
relevant information in a nonjudgmental manner.
■ Reflecting or validating to show empathetic understanding
clients’ problems. These techniques can also assist clients
understanding negative thought patterns.
■ Paraphrasing and clarifying by social workers to rephrase wh
clients are saying in order to join together information. Clarificatio
uses questioning, paraphrasing, and restating to ensure f
understanding of clients’ ideas and thoughts.
■ Reframing by social workers shows clients that there are differe
perspectives and ideas that can help to change negative thinkin
patterns and promote change.
■ Exhibiting desirable facial expressions, which include direct ey
contact if culturally appropriate, warmth and concern reflected, an
varied facial expressions.
■ Using desirable postures or gestures, which include appropria
arm movements and attentive gestures.
There are many methods that social workers use to facilitate
communication with clients. Central to the formation of a therapeutic
alliance is displaying empathy. Empathy is distinguished from sympathy
as the latter denotes pity or feeling bad for a client, whereas the former
means that a social worker understands the ideas expressed, as well
as the feelings of a client. To be empathetic, a social worker must
433
accurately perceive a client’s situation, perspective, and feelings, as
well as communicate this understanding in a helpful (therapeutic) way.
A social worker should also display genuineness in order to build
trust. Genuineness is needed in order to establish a therapeutic
relationship. It involves listening to and communicating with clients
without distorting their messages, as well as being clear and concrete
in communications.
Another method is the use of positive regard, which is the ability to
view a client as being worthy of caring about and as someone who has
strengths and achievement potential. It is built on respect and is usually
communicated nonverbally.
Communication is also facilitated by listening, attending,
suspending value judgments, and helping clients develop their own
resources. A social worker should always use culturally appropriate
communication.
It is also essential to clearly establish boundaries with clients to
facilitate a safe environment for change.
THE CONCEPT OF CONGRUENCE IN COMMUNICATION
Communication can be verbal and nonverbal, so an assessment of
clients’ communication skills must involve both. Role playing is a good
way to assess and enhance clients’ communication skills. It also allows
a social worker to see if there is congruence between nonverbal and
verbal communication.
Congruence is the matching of awareness and experience with
309
communication. It is essential that a client is able to communicate
freely and that this communication is reflective of the client’s feelings.
Congruence is essential for the vitality of a relationship and to facilitate
true helping as part of the problem-solving process.
METHODS TO OBTAIN AND PROVIDE FEEDBACK
Social workers interface with professionals and others in order to
achieve the best possible outcomes for clients. Feedback is essential in
order to learn what works and what can be done better.
There is no single method for social workers to seek feedback.
Many factors may impact on how such feedback is solicited and
434
incorporated into practice. However, there are some important
principles that social workers should adhere to when obtaining or
providing feedback.
1. Feedback may be either verbal or nonverbal, so social worke
must make efforts to see what clients are trying to convey verba
or via their behavior and nonverbal cues in order to see wheth
interventions should be altered.
2. When social workers involve consultants or others in the feedba
process related to client care, clients should provide consent.
3. Social workers should ask for feedback in difficult circumstances
not just when circumstances appear neutral or positive. It can b
tempting only to ask for feedback from people who will s
something positive. Sometimes the best learning can be from thos
who will be critical. Talking through difficult feedback in supervisio
is important.
4. Feedback is especially critical at key decision points (such as whe
transferring or terminating with clients).
5. It is important to guard against influencing people to respond in
particular way; this influence may be unintentional, because a soc
worker may have more influence or power than the individual fro
whom feedback is sought.
6. Confidentiality should be respected if the informant wants it.
7. Always be clear about why feedback is needed and what will b
done with the information.
8. Documentation of feedback is essential.
9. Be aware that the feedback may be very different depending upo
when it is solicited. It is critical to realize how recent events ma
have influenced information received. Getting feedback repeated
at several different times may be needed to see if responses differ
10. A social worker must make sure that the communication method
appropriate. For a younger person, texting, email, or an onlin
questionnaire may work, whereas a face-to-face conversation ma
be needed for others. The language should be jargon free an
435
issues such as language, culture, and disability may affect th
ways in which people both understand and react to requests f
feedback. A social worker may want to use closed-ende
questions and/or open ones to capture needed data.
There are varied methods for feedback. It can be formal or informal,
mutual or one-way, written or verbal, personal or impersonal, and/or
requested or unsolicited. Feedback can even be anonymous.
The following are some common feedback methods.
310
One-on-One Feedback
An individual delivering feedback to another, face-to-face, is probably
the most common form. Such feedback needs to be delivered
sensitively and according to the principles of the profession.
Intragroup Feedback
Individuals in a group provide feedback to the group and/or to one or
more individuals within the group. If the feedback is directed to the
performance of the group, it can be particularly effective.
Group-to-Group Feedback
This might take place between two groups that are working together.
The feedback may go in one direction or both. The feedback might be
directed at particular individuals or at the group as a whole.
Consultative Feedback
An individual or group serves as a formal or informal consultant to
another (usually to a group, but occasionally to an individual). The
individual or group receiving the feedback may be more apt to accept
and consider the feedback, given the expertise of the consultative
entity, but has no obligation to do so.
360° Feedback
This method involves feedback from all directions—supervisors, peers,
subordinates, the community, and so forth. The idea is that the
feedback reflects multiple viewpoints and gives a complete picture.
436
All models of feedback in social work practice should be supportive,
use a strengths perspective (emphasizing the positives), not “attack,”
and focus on actions needed for change.
437
CHAPTER311
8
The Intervention Process
THE PRINCIPLES AND TECHNIQUES OF INTERVIEWING
(E.G., SUPPORTING, CLARIFYING, FOCUSING,
CONFRONTING, VALIDATING, FEEDBACK, REFLECTING,
LANGUAGE DIFFERENCES, USE OF INTERPRETERS,
REDIRECTING)
In social work, an interview is always purposeful and involves verbal and
nonverbal communication between a social worker and client, during
which ideas, attitudes, and feelings are exchanged. The actions of a
social worker aim to gather important information and keep a client
focused on the achievement of the goal.
A social work interview is designed to serve the interest of a client;
therefore, the actions of a social worker during the interview must be
planned and focused. Questions in a social work interview should be
tailored to the specifics of a client, not generic, “one size fits all” inquiries.
The focus is on the uniqueness of a client and the client’s unique
situation.
The purpose of the social work interview can be informational,
diagnostic, or therapeutic. The same interview may serve more than one
purpose.
Communication during a social work interview is interactive and
interrelational. A social worker’s questions will result in specific responses
by a client that, in turn, lead to other inquiries. The message is formulated
by a client, encoded, transmitted, received, processed, and decoded. The
importance of words and messages may be implicit (implied) or explicit
(evident). A social worker should listen, being nonjudgmental, throughout
a social work interview.
438
There are a number of techniques that a social worker may use during
an interview to assist clients.
■ Clarification—reformulate problem in a client’s words to make sure th
the social worker is on the same wavelength
■ Confrontation—calling attention to something
■ Interpretation—pulling together patterns of behavior to get a ne
understanding
■ Reframing and relabeling—stating problem in a different way so a clie
can see possible solutions
■
Summarization—identifying key ideas and themes regarding
312
client problems to provide focus and continuity to an interview
■ Universalization—the generalization or normalization of behavior
Summarization seeks to bring together the important points of a
discussion and to give a client and social worker awareness of the
progress made. It can give a client a sense that a social worker
understands and/or brings a sense of closure. It omits irrelevant
information and organizes pertinent aspects of the interaction. It allows a
social worker and a client to leave an interaction with the same ideas in
mind and provides a sense of closure at the completion of a discussion.
Summarizing can be done periodically throughout the discussion or only
at its close. But no matter who does it or how frequently it occurs,
summarization is a valuable intervention technique.
During summarization, a social worker and a client strive to grasp the
significance of what has been said, to formulate the meaning of the
information, and to achieve new understandings. Summarization is helpful
in pulling together what seems to be disorganized or unrelated material.
There are a variety of summarization approaches. A social worker can
summarize the content and essential feelings expressed at any point or at
the end of an interaction. A social worker can ask a client to review what
has been accomplished or the status of the presenting problem. Finally, a
social worker and a client may jointly look at what has been achieved.
Summarization statements can include a social worker saying, “Have I
got this correct…?,” “You have said that…,” and/or “During the past hour,
you and I have discussed. …”
Social workers must be proficient in the languages spoken by clients
or use qualified interpreters. It is not appropriate to use family members to
439
interpret or provide services in which social workers are not linguistically
competent as valuable information may be missed during social work
interviews. When working with interpreters, social workers should face
clients and speak directly to them—not the interpreters. Social workers
also should not ask for the opinions of the interpreters or have
conversations with them as their focus must be on clients.
THE PHASES OF INTERVENTION AND TREATMENT
The use of timing in social work interventions is critical. Both verbal
expressions and nonverbal communication by a social worker, if timed
appropriately, can cause a client to feel joined with a social worker,
resulting in a stronger therapeutic alliance that can lead to enhanced
outcomes. However, the same expressions or communication at the
wrong time can result in a client thinking that a social worker is not aligned
or relating to a client’s experiences.
Social workers must examine cues provided by clients to determine
the appropriateness of communication styles and strategies, as well as
when clients are ready to move forward in the problem-solving process. In
addition, sometimes a social worker must reassess, with a client, the
continued appropriateness of an agreed upon intervention because
factors have made it no longer feasible or desirable.
Maslow’s hierarchy of needs can help identify which client problems
need immediate attention and should be prioritized for intervention first.
Often clients have multiple service needs that must be prioritized. Social
workers should consider Maslow’s hierarchy of needs when working with
clients. Clients will need services that address “deficiency needs”
313
(such as those related to physiological, security, social, and esteem
concerns) prior to accessing support to promote their “growth needs”
(such as self-actualization).
In addition, making sure that psychological and social issues are not
caused, and cannot be subsequently addressed, by medical and/or
substance use issues is paramount. Social workers should always
address these problems first.
Interventions and services are intended to aid clients in alleviating
problems impeding their well-being. The interventions used by social
workers and the services available to clients are those that are identified
as potentially helpful on the basis of the ongoing assessment of clients.
The selection and prioritization of service needs may be driven by
many factors, including client desires and motivation, treatment modality
440
selected, agency setting, available resources, funding and time
constraints, and so forth. A social worker should focus on ensuring that
service needs chosen are outlined in the intervention or treatment plan
and are reevaluated on a regular basis. A social worker should also make
sure that the needs are based on an unbiased assessment and client
wishes. They should not be solely driven by funding and time constraints.
Social workers should not recommend only services that are familiar
or provided by their employing agencies because this is a “cookie cutter”
or “one size fits all” approach.
Social work aims to assist with making change on the micro, mezzo,
or macro levels to enhance well-being. Despite the level of intervention,
the steps that a social worker takes are similar.
Step 1: Engagement with client, group, or community
In engagement, a social worker should be actively involved in
determining why change is sought, what has precipitated the desire to
change now, and the parameters of the helping relationship, including
defining the roles of a social worker and the expectations for treatment
(what will occur and when it will happen).
Step 2: Assessment of strengths and needs
In assessment, essential information is collected upon which to define
the problem and solutions, as well as identify collateral contacts from
which gaps in data can be collected.
Step 3: Planning or design of intervention
In planning, an understanding of the problem is developed. Goals are
developed from this understanding in order to provide a direction to help
or assist. Specific action plans are developed and agreed upon in order to
specify who will do what, what resources will be needed and how they will
be used, and timelines for implementation and review.
Step 4: Intervention aimed at making change
In intervention, there is active involvement to realize continued
progress and sustainable change. Issues that may threaten goal
attainment must be addressed. Progress must be tracked and plans and
timelines adjusted accordingly.
Step 5: Evaluation of efforts
In evaluation, subjective reports, in conjunction with objective
indicators of progress, should be used to determine when goals and
objectives have been met and whether new goals or objectives should be
set.
Step 6: Termination and anticipation of future needs
314
441
In termination, progress that has been achieved should be reviewed
and supports anticipated to be needed in the future should be identified.
Usually change does not occur easily and there are stages of change
that occur. Understanding these stages can help achieve goals.
Precontemplation Denial, ignorance of the problem
Contemplation Ambivalence, conflicted emotion
Preparation Experimenting with small changes, collecting
information about change
Action Maintenance Taking direct action toward achieving a goal
Maintaining a new behavior, avoiding
temptation
Relapse Feelings of frustration and failure
In order for real change to occur, all intervention steps must occur and
change must be understood in these sequential stages.
To achieve this goal, social workers must engage in interactions at
three levels of intervention—micro, mezzo, and macro.
Micro
At the micro level of intervention, social workers concentrate on helping
clients solve their problems. These problems may relate to difficulties with
partners/spouses, children, other family members, coworkers, and/or
neighbors. At the micro level, social workers help clients to access
needed services from other agencies, as well as provide direct support
and counseling. This type of social work intervention is often the focus of
clinical practice in social work and clients can include individuals, couples,
and/or families.
Mezzo
The second level of intervention for social workers is mezzo (also known
as meso). Mezzo interventions apply to larger groups or communities. At
the mezzo intervention level, social workers attempt to make connections
between the micro and macro levels.
Macro
442
The third level of intervention for social workers is macro. This level
stresses the importance of economic, historical, sociopolitical, and
environmental influences on client well-being and functioning. Social
workers determine how these factors can facilitate growth and/or create
problems for clients.
Social workers are charged with making systems-level changes that can
lead to opportunities and/or reduce barriers. Macro interventions can
include creating or changing policies, procedures, regulations, and
315
laws. They are aimed at not only assisting individual clients, but others
who are experiencing the same difficulties. The focus of social work to
engage in broader macro-level changes is what distinguishes it from other
allied professions.
PROBLEM-SOLVING MODELS AND APPROACHES (E.G.,
BRIEF, SOLUTION-FOCUSED METHODS OR TECHNIQUES)
The problem-solving approach is based on the belief that an inability to
cope with a problem is due to some lack of motivation, capacity, or
opportunity to solve problems in an appropriate way. Clients’ problem-
solving capacities or resources are maladaptive or impaired.
The goal of the problem-solving process is to enhance client mental,
emotional, and action capacities for coping with problems and/or making
accessible the opportunities and resources necessary to generate
solutions to problems.
A social worker engages in the problem-solving process via the
following steps:
1. Engaging
2. Assessing (includes a focus on client strengths and not ju
weaknesses)
3. Planning
4. Intervening
5. Evaluating
6. Terminating
Short-Term Interventions
443
The growing need for time-limited treatment, fueled by the widening
influence of managed care in the behavioral health field, has produced a
renewed focus on short-term therapy. Short-term interventions vary
greatly in their duration.
Research has suggested that a social worker’s and client’s views on
the time of treatment are more important than the duration of treatment
itself. Sometimes these approaches are used because of organizational or
financial constraints. In other instances, clients are choosing them over
open-ended approaches. Although some have been wary of the
effectiveness of these techniques to instill long-lasting change, they are
being used more broadly than ever before. Some short-term interventions
include a crisis intervention model and a cognitive behavioral model.
Although psychoanalysis is often thought of as long term, this was not
the case with Freud’s early work, and psychoanalysis did not start out this
way. A number of short-term psychodynamic approaches focus on the
belief that childhood experiences are the root of adult dysfunction.
THE CLIENT’S/CLIENT SYSTEM’S ROLE IN THE PROBLEM-
SOLVING PROCESS
Clients often tend to think of themselves and their problems as unique. A
client may think difficulties are so different from those of others that no
one else could ever understand them. The client may even enjoy this
316
feeling of uniqueness. It may be a defense against the discomfort of
exploring fears of being like others. At this point, a client may not be ready
to look at the problem. It is hard to admit difficulties, even to oneself.
There may also be concerns as to whether social workers can really
be trusted. Some people, because of unfortunate experiences in their
childhoods, grow up with distrust of others. Furthermore, people are
generally afraid of what others will think of them.
A client may only be looking for sympathy, support, and/or empathy,
rather than searching for a new way to solve difficulties. A client may not
see that change must occur. When a social worker points out some of the
ways in which a client is contributing to a problem, the client may stop
listening. Solving the problem often requires a client to confront issues
that have been avoided in the past and the client wants to avoid thinking
about in the future.
A client may have struggled very hard to achieve independence. The
thought of depending on or receiving help from another individual seems
to violate something. A client must constantly defend against a sense of
444
weakness and may have difficulty listening to and using the assistance of
another person.
There are also many clients who have strong needs to lean on others.
Some spend much of their lives looking for others on whom they can be
dependent. In the helping situation, they may constantly and
inappropriately seek to repeat this pattern.
METHODS TO ENGAGE AND MOTIVATE CLIENTS/CLIENT
SYSTEMS
A motivational approach aims to help clients realize what needs to change
and to get them to talk about their daily lives, as well as their satisfaction
with current situations. Social workers want to create doubt that
everything is “OK” and help clients recognize consequences of current
behaviors or conditions that contribute to dissatisfaction.
It is much easier if clients believe goals can be achieved and life can
be different. Sometimes clients are incapacitated by conditions that need
to be addressed first (i.e., depression). Social workers can help clients
think of a time when things were better or create a picture of what their
lives could look like with fewer stresses.
The role of a social worker is to create an atmosphere that is
conducive to change and to increase a client’s intrinsic motivation, so that
change arises from within rather than being imposed from without.
Motivation is a state of readiness or eagerness to change, which may
fluctuate from one time or situation to another.
Some additional techniques include:
■ Clearly identifying the problem or risk area
■ Explaining why change is important
■ Advocating for specific change
■ Identifying barriers and working to remove them
■ Finding the best course of action
■ Setting goals
■Taking steps toward change
■ Preventing relapse
317
445
Empathy is a factor that increases motivation, lowers resistance, and
fosters greater long-term behavioral change.
METHODS TO ENGAGE AND WORK WITH INVOLUNTARY
CLIENTS/CLIENT SYSTEMS
Social workers often find themselves providing services to those who did
not choose to receive them, but instead have to do so as mandated by
law, including families in the child protection system, people in the criminal
justice system, and so on. Working with involuntary clients can be
challenging because they may want to have no contact or may only
participate because they feel that they have no other choice.
Often these situations require social workers to receive peer support
or supervision to process struggles encountered, as well as reassert their
professionalism, because clients may try to test and exhibit anger at social
workers, who represent the mandates placed upon them.
Some methods that can be helpful in working with involuntary clients
include:
■ Acknowledging clients’ circumstances and understanding how th
came about given clients’ histories
■ Listening to clients’ experiences in order to try to understand how th
feel about intervention
■ Engaging in clear communication because involuntary clients strugg
to understand what is happening to them
■ Making clear what the purpose of the intervention is, what clients ha
control over and what they do not, what is going to happen next, a
what the likely consequences will be if they do not participate
■ Assisting at an appropriate pace as progress may be slow
■ Building trust, even on the smallest scale, by consistently being hone
and up-front about the situation and why a social worker is involved
■ Giving clients practical assistance when needed to help them fight f
their rights
■ Paying attention to what is positive in clients’ behavior and celebrati
achievements
446
■ Showing empathy and viewing clients as more than the problems th
brought them into services
LIMIT-SETTING TECHNIQUES
Clients of all ages are frequently desperate for an environment with
consistent boundaries. For this reason, it is helpful if social workers can
learn limit-setting skills. Limit setting is facilitative as clients do not feel
safe or accepted in a completely permissive environment.
In addition, although compassion is important for a social worker, it is
318
important to maintain a client–social worker relationship.
Understanding boundaries and being able to maintain those boundaries
with clients are essential.
THE TECHNIQUE OF ROLE PLAY
Role playing is a teaching strategy that offers several advantages. Role
playing in social work practice may be seen between supervisor and
supervisee or social worker and client.
In all instances, role playing usually raises interest in a topic as clients
are not passive recipients in the learning process. In addition, role playing
teaches empathy and understanding of different perspectives as clients
take on the role of another, learning and acting as that individual would in
the specified setting. In role playing, participation helps embed concepts.
Role playing gives clarity to information that may be abstract or difficult to
understand.
The use of role playing emphasizes personal concerns, problems,
behavior, and active participation. It improves interpersonal and
communication skills, and enhances communication.
Role playing activities can be divided into four stages:
1. Preparation and explanation of the activity
2. Preparation of the activity
3. Role playing
4. Discussion or debriefing after the role play activity
ROLE-MODELING TECHNIQUES
447
Role modeling emphasizes the importance of learning from observing and
imitating and has been used successfully in helping clients acquire new
skills, including those associated with assertiveness.
Role modeling works well when it is combined with role play and
reinforcement to produce lasting change.
There are different types of modeling, including live modeling,
symbolic modeling, participant modeling, or covert modeling.
Live modeling refers to watching a real person perform the desired
behavior.
Symbolic modeling includes filmed or videotaped models
demonstrating the desired behavior. Self-modeling is another form of
symbolic modeling in which clients are videotaped performing the target
behavior.
In participant modeling, an individual models anxiety-evoking
behaviors for a client and then prompts the client to engage in the
behavior.
In covert modeling, clients are asked to use their imagination,
visualizing a particular behavior as another describes the imaginary
situation in detail.
Models in any of these forms may be presented as either a coping or a
mastery model. The coping model is shown as initially fearful or
incompetent, and then is shown as gradually becoming comfortable and
competent performing the feared behavior. The mastery model shows no
fear and is competent from the beginning of the demonstration.
TECHNIQUES FOR HARM REDUCTION FOR SELF AND
319
OTHERS
A harm reduction approach refers to any program, policy, or intervention
that seeks to reduce or minimize the adverse health and social
consequences associated with an illness, condition, and/or behavior, such
as substance use, without requiring a client to practice abstinence,
discontinue use, or completely extinguish the behavior. This definition
recognizes that many clients are unwilling or unable to abstain from
behaviors or use at any given time and that there is a need to provide
them with options that minimize the harm caused by their condition to
themselves, to others, and to the community.
Harm reduction complements prevention approaches because it is
based on the acceptance that, despite best efforts, clients will engage in
448
behaviors such as substance use, and are unable or unwilling to stop
using substances at any given time.
In addition, clients who use substances may prefer to use informal and
nonclinical methods to reduce their consumption or reduce the risks
associated with use. Harm reduction is practical, feasible, effective, safe,
and cost-effective. Most harm reduction approaches are inexpensive,
easy to implement, and have a high impact on individual and community
health.
Harm reduction acknowledges the significance of ANY positive
change that clients make in their lives; these interventions are designed to
“meet clients where they are” currently.
Harm reduction recognizes that intervention can be seen as a
continuum with the more feasible options at one end and less feasible, but
desirable, ones at the other end. Though desirable, abstinence can be
considered difficult to achieve. Thus, social workers should partner with
clients to identify actions that can be taken to minimize impacts of their
illnesses, conditions, and/or behaviors.
METHODS TO TEACH COPING AND OTHER SELF-CARE
SKILLS TO CLIENTS/CLIENT SYSTEMS
Social workers assist clients in realizing how their lives can improve
and/or how they can learn from mistakes that they have made. The
techniques that social workers employ are a form of informal or didactic
teaching.
For example, social workers may help clients see:
■ How their histories have shaped them
■ Needs associated with medical and/or behavioral health conditions
■ Developmental issues related to various phases across the lifespan
■ The workings of systems in which they operate
■ Ways of coping in various situations
A social worker must use the problem-solving process to teach clients
skills needed to make changes in their lives.
In addition, social workers may collaborate with or inform clients of
colleagues who may also assist with more formal teaching, such as
449
learning to read, obtaining a driver’s license, and so on.
CLIENT/CLIENT SYSTEM SELF-MONITORING
TECHNIQUES
320
Clients are encouraged to pay attention to any subtle shift in feelings.
Clients frequently keep thought or emotion logs that include three
components: (a) disturbing emotional states, (b) the exact behaviors
engaged in at the time of the emotional states, and (c) thoughts that
occurred when the emotions emerged. In cognitive behavioral therapy
(CBT), homework is often done between sessions to record these
encounters. This homework involves client self-monitoring, which is
central to this approach.
METHODS OF CONFLICT RESOLUTION
Management of conflict entails four steps:
1. The recognition of an existing or potential conflict
2. An assessment of the conflict situation
3. The selection of an appropriate strategy
4. Intervention
When previous attempts to resolve a conflict have only escalated the
conflict, a useful technique is to structure the interactions between the
parties. Structuring techniques include:
1. Decreasing the amount of contact between the parties in the ea
stages of conflict resolution
2. Decreasing the amount of time between problem-solving sessions
3. Decreasing the formality of problem-solving sessions
4. Limiting the scope of the issues that can be discussed
5. Using a third-party mediator
CRISIS INTERVENTION AND TREATMENT APPROACHES
450
A state of crisis is time limited. Brief intervention during a crisis usually
provides maximum therapeutic effect. Crisis intervention is a process of
actively influencing the psychosocial functioning of clients during a period
of disequilibrium or crisis. A crisis does not need to be precipitated by a
major life event. The goals are to alleviate stress and mobilize coping
skills, psychological capabilities, and social resources.
The goals of crisis intervention are to (a) relieve the impact of stress
with emotional and social resources, (b) return a client to a previous level
of functioning (regain equilibrium), (c) help strengthen coping mechanisms
during the crisis period, and (d) develop adaptive coping strategies.
Crisis intervention focuses on the here and now, is time limited (most
crises last from 4 to 6 weeks), is directive, and requires high levels of
activity and involvement from a social worker. A social worker sets specific
goals and tasks in order to increase a client’s sense of mastery and
control.
ANGER MANAGEMENT TECHNIQUES
321
Although everyone gets angry, clients may come to social workers
because they are not able to control their anger, causing problems. Anger
can also increase risk for developing physical health problems, such as
heart disease, stress-related illnesses, insomnia, digestive issues, and/or
headaches.
Social workers can assist clients to develop action or treatment plans
to change these behaviors. Techniques for assisting clients can include
one or more of the following.
Relaxation Exercises
■ Deep breathing
■ Meditation or repeating calming words/phrases
■ Guided imagery
■ Yoga
■ Stretching or physical exercise
Assisting clients to practice these techniques regularly will result in
using them automatically in tense situations.
451
Cognitive Techniques
■ Replacing destructive thoughts, such as “This is the end of the wor
with healthy ones like “This is frustrating, but it will pass”
■ Focusing on goals as a way of finding solutions to problems
■ Using logic to get a more balanced perspective
■ Not using an “all or nothing” approach
■ Putting situations into perspective
Communication Skills
■ Slowing down speech to avoid saying something not meant or that o
will regret
■ Listening to what others are saying
■ Thinking about what to say before speaking
■ Avoiding defensiveness
■ Using humor to lighten the situation
Environmental Change
■ Walking away or leaving situation
■ Avoiding people or situations in the future that evoke anger
■ Not starting conversations or entering situations that may cause ang
when tired or rushed
STRESS MANAGEMENT TECHNIQUES
322
Stress is a psychological and/or physical reaction to life events, with most
people experiencing it regularly in their own lives. When a life event is
seen as a threat, it signals the release of hormones aimed at generating a
response. This process has been labeled the “fight-or-flight” response.
Once the threat is gone, clients should return to typical relaxed states,
but this may not happen if other threats are presented immediately
452
thereafter. Thus, stress management is important because it provides
tools to deal with threats and minimize the impacts of psychological and/or
physical reactions.
The first step in stress management is for clients to monitor their
stress levels and identify their stress triggers. These can be major life
events, but also those associated with day-to-day life, such as job
pressures, relationship problems, or financial difficulties. Positive life
events, such as getting a job promotion, getting married, or having
children, also can be stressful.
The second step in stress management is to assist clients in
identifying what aspects of a situation they can control. Clients can make
these changes, as well as benefit from stress-reduction techniques, such
as deep breathing, exercise, massage, tai chi, or yoga, to manage those
aspects of a situation that cannot be altered. Maintaining a healthy
lifestyle is essential to helping manage stress.
Stress will always be a part of life, but assisting clients to manage it
can increase their ability to cope with challenges and enhance their
psychological and/or physical well-being.
THE IMPACT OF OUT-OF-HOME DISPLACEMENT (E.G.,
NATURAL DISASTER, HOMELESSNESS, IMMIGRATION) ON
CLIENTS/CLIENT SYSTEMS
The homes in which clients live are part of their self-definition. They are
decorated to reflect likes or dislikes, telling others about their occupants
and accommodating interests such as gardening, cooking, and others.
Homes are seen as extensions of their residents and distinguish people
from each other.
Behavior is also cued by the physical environment. Homes remind
inhabitants of experiences which took place in the past, as well as what to
do in the future. Homes are familiar and are often viewed as safe havens
where clients can behave without being judged.
Thus, involuntary displacement outside the home due to
hospitalization, incarceration, needed safety, or long-term care needs can
be traumatic for many reasons. First, such movement may be associated
with losses such as those due to health issues, financial concerns, or
safety problems. These losses alone can cause depression, anxiety,
confusion, and/or other emotional reactions, which are compounded from
having to move from the communities or homes in which clients live.
453
In out-of-home placements, clients may have changes in roles,
causing them to develop poor self-image. For example, the roles of
neighbor, community leader, gardener, and so on, which provided
fulfillment and recognition, may be lost and no longer possible. Since
there is also status attached to these roles, their loss can negatively affect
self-image.
There also may be a loss of possessions associated with displacement.
Precious items that represent a lifetime of memories may have been
destroyed, such as by a natural disaster, or sold/given away as there
323
may be no room to keep them in the new settings—especially if they
are shared with others.
There also may be a cost associated with involuntary displacement.
For example, long-term care can drain client assets and make clients feel
guilty about spending money on themselves or fearful about running out of
funds for sustained care and housing.
Out-of-home displacement also often accompanies loss of
relationships. Relatives and friends who interfaced with clients in their
homes may find it inconvenient or impossible to see them in the new
settings. Sometimes the lack of private space in which to visit puts up
barriers. Visitors may also be intimidated by the sights and sounds of
hospitals, jails, or nursing homes.
Clients frequently do not have the same freedom or control that they
had when they were at home. In congregate settings, meals, activities,
room cleaning, and bathing may be overseen and scheduled for the sake
of organization and efficiency, and there are usually numerous rules,
policies, and procedures to follow with less individual autonomy and
choice.
METHODS TO CREATE, IMPLEMENT, AND EVALUATE
POLICIES AND PROCEDURES THAT MINIMIZE RISK FOR
INDIVIDUALS, FAMILIES, GROUPS, ORGANIZATIONS, AND
COMMUNITIES
Social workers should create, implement, and evaluate policies that
minimize risk for clients, workers, and practice settings. One critical
feature of implementing a comprehensive risk management strategy is
conducting a comprehensive ethics audit. An ethics audit entails
examining risks through the following steps:
454
1. Appointing a committee or task force of concerned and informed sta
and colleagues
2. Gathering information from agency documents, interviews with st
and clients, accreditation reports, and other sources to assess ris
associated with client rights; confidentiality and privacy; informe
consent; service delivery; boundary issues; conflicts of intere
documentation; client records; supervision; staff development an
training; consultation; client referral; fraud; termination of service
professional impairment; misconduct, or incompetence; and so on
3. Reviewing all collected information
4. Determining whether there is no risk, minimal risk, moderate risk,
high risk in each area
5. Preparing action plans to address each risk, paying particular attentio
to policies that need to be created to prevent risk in the future a
steps needed to mitigate existing risk
6. Monitoring policy implementation and progress made toward reduci
existing risk, as well as ensuring that procedures adhere to soc
work’s core ethical principles
Risk management is an ongoing process and must consist of
preventive strategies as well as corrective actions that result from audits
done routinely or in response to particular concerns or complaints.
PSYCHOTHERAPIES
324
Psychotherapy aims to treat clients with mental disorders or problems by
helping them understand their illness or situation. Social workers use
verbal techniques to teach clients strategies to deal with stress, unhealthy
thoughts, and dysfunctional behaviors. Psychotherapy helps clients
manage their symptoms better and function optimally in everyday life.
Sometimes, psychotherapy alone may be the best treatment for a
client, depending on the illness and its severity. Other times,
psychotherapy is combined with the use of medication or a
psychopharmacological approach.
There are many kinds of psychotherapy, so social workers must
determine which is best to meet a client’s need. A social worker should
not use a “one size fits all approach” or a particular type of psychotherapy
455
because it is more familiar or convenient. Some psychotherapies have
been scientifically tested more than others for particular disorders.
For example, cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT), a blend of cognitive
and behavioral therapy, is used for depression, anxiety, and other
disorders. Dialectical behavior therapy (DBT), a form of CBT developed
by Marsha Linehan, was developed to treat people with suicidal thoughts
and actions. It is now also used to treat people with Borderline Personality
Disorder. A social worker assures a client that the client’s feelings are
valid and understandable, but coaches him or her to understand that they
are unhealthy or disruptive and a balance must be achieved. A client
understands that it is the client’s personal responsibility to change the
situation.
Some psychotherapies are effective with children and adolescents and
can also be used with families.
PSYCHOANALYTIC AND PSYCHODYNAMIC APPROACHES
Psychodynamic theories explain the origin of the personality. Although
many different psychodynamic theories exist, they all emphasize
unconscious motives and desires, as well as the importance of childhood
experiences in shaping personality.
Psychodynamic approaches aim to help clients review emotions,
thoughts, early life experiences, and beliefs in order to gain insight into
their lives and their present-day problems. Recognizing recurring patterns
helps clients see the ways in which they avoid distress and/or develop
defense mechanisms as methods of coping so that they can take steps to
change these patterns.
In order to keep painful feelings, memories, and experiences in the
unconscious, clients tend to develop defense mechanisms, such as
denial, repression, rationalization, and others. Social workers using
psychodynamic approaches encourage clients to speak freely about their
emotions, desires, and fears in order to reveal vulnerable feelings that
have been pushed out of conscious awareness. According to
psychodynamic theory, behavior is influenced by unconscious thought;
vulnerable or painful feelings are resolved by the use of defense
mechanisms.
The therapeutic relationship is central to psychodynamic approaches
because it takes an intimate look at interpersonal relationships so that
clients can see relationship patterns. It also empowers clients, through
insight and self-awareness, to transform dysfunctional dynamics.
456
Psychoanalytic Theory
325
Originally developed by Sigmund Freud, a client is seen as the product of
his past and treatment involves dealing with the repressed material in the
unconscious. According to psychoanalytic theory, personalities arise
because of attempts to resolve conflicts between unconscious sexual and
aggressive impulses and societal demands to restrain these impulses.
Freud believed that behavior and personality derive from the constant
and unique interaction of conflicting psychological forces that operate at
three different levels of awareness: the preconscious, the
conscious, and the unconscious.
The conscious contains all the information that a client is paying
attention to at any given time.
The preconscious contains all the information outside of a client’s
attention but readily available if needed—thoughts and feelings that can
be brought into consciousness easily.
The unconscious contains thoughts, feelings, desires, and
memories of which clients have no awareness but that influence every
aspect of their day-to-day lives.
Freud proposed that personalities have three components: the id, the
ego, and the superego.
■ Id: A reservoir of instinctual energy that contains biological urges su
as impulses toward survival, sex, and aggression. The id
unconscious and operates according to the pleasure principle, t
drive to achieve pleasure and avoid pain.
■ Ego: The component that manages the conflict between the id and t
constraints of the real world. Some parts of the ego are unconsciou
whereas others are preconscious or conscious. The ego operat
according to the reality principle—the awareness that gratification
impulses has to be delayed in order to accommodate the demands
the real world. The ego’s role is to prevent the id from gratifying
impulses in socially inappropriate ways.
Ego-Syntonic/Ego-Dystonic:
■ Syntonic = behaviors “insync” with the ego (no guilt)
■ Dystonic = behavior “dis-n-sync” with the ego (guilt)
457
The ego’s job is to determine the best course of action based on
information from the id, reality, and the superego. When the ego is
comfortable with its conclusions and behaviors, a client is said to be ego-
syntonic. However, if a client is bothered by some behaviors, the client
would be ego-dystonic (ego alien).
Inability of the ego to reconcile the demands of the id, the superego,
and reality produces conflict that leads to a state of psychic distress
known as anxiety.
Ego strength is the ability of the ego to effectively deal with the
demands of the id, the superego, and reality. Those with little ego strength
may feel torn between these competing demands, whereas those with too
much ego strength can become too unyielding and rigid. Ego strength
helps maintain emotional stability and cope with internal and external
stress.
■ Superego: The moral component of personality. It contains all th
moral standards learned from parents and society. The superego forc
the ego to conform not only to reality, but also to its ideals of morali
Hence, the superego causes clients to feel guilty when they go again
society’s rules.
Psychosexual Stages of Development
326
Freud believed that personality solidifies during childhood, largely before
age 5. He proposed five stages of psychosexual development: the oral
stage, the anal stage, the phallic stage; the latency stage, and the genital
stage. He believed that at each stage of development, children gain
sexual gratification or sensual pleasure from a particular part of their
bodies. Each stage has special conflicts, and children’s ways of managing
these conflicts influence their personalities.
If a child’s needs in a particular stage are gratified too much or
frustrated too much, the child can become fixated at that stage of
development. Fixation is an inability to progress normally from one
stage into another. When the child becomes an adult, the fixation shows
up as a tendency to focus on the needs that were overgratified or
overfrustrated.
Freud believed that the crucially important Oedipus complex also
developed during the phallic stage. The Oedipus complex refers to a male
child’s sexual desire for his mother and hostility toward his father, whom
458
he considers to be a rival for his mother’s love. Freud thought that a male
child who sees a naked girl for the first time believes that her penis has
been cut off. The child fears that his own father will do the same to him for
desiring his mother—a fear called castration anxiety. Because of this
fear, the child represses his longing for his mother and begins to identify
with his father. The child’s acceptance of his father’s authority results in
the emergence of the superego.
In psychoanalytic psychotherapy, the primary technique used is
analysis (of dreams, resistances, transferences, and free associations).
Individual Psychology
Alfred Adler, a follower of Freud and a member of his inner circle,
eventually broke away from Freud and developed his own school of
thought, which he called “individual psychology.” Adler believed that
327
the main motivations for human behavior are not sexual
or aggressive urges, but striving for perfection. He pointed out
that children naturally feel weak and inadequate in comparison to adults.
This normal feeling of inferiority drives them to adapt, develop skills, and
master challenges. Adler used the term “compensation” to refer to the
attempt to shed normal feelings of inferiority.
However, some people suffer from an exaggerated sense of
inferiority. Such people overcompensate, which means that, rather than
459
try to master challenges, they try to cover up their sense of inferiority by
focusing on outward signs of superiority such as status, wealth, and
power.
Healthy individuals have a broad social concern and want to contribute
to the welfare of others. Unhealthy people are those who are
overwhelmed by feelings of inferiority.
The aim of therapy is to develop a more adaptive lifestyle by
overcoming feelings of inferiority and self-centeredness and to contribute
more toward the welfare of others.
Self Psychology
This approach defines the self as the central organizing and motivating
force in personality. As a result of receiving empathic responses from
early caretakers (self-objects), a child’s needs are met and the child
develops a strong sense of selfhood. “Empathic failures” by caretakers
result in a lack of self-cohesion.
The objective of self psychology is to help a client develop a greater
sense of self-cohesion. Through therapeutic regression, a client
reexperiences frustrated self-object needs.
Three self-object needs are:
■ Mirroring: behavior validates the child’s sense of a perfect self.
■ Idealization: child borrows strength from others and identifies w
someone more capable.
■ Twinship/Twinning: child needs an alter ego for a sense
belonging.
Ego Psychology
Ego psychology focuses on the rational, conscious processes of the ego.
Ego psychology is based on an assessment of a client as presented in the
present (here and now). Treatment focuses on the ego functioning of a
client, because healthy behavior is under the control of the ego. It
addresses:
■ Behavior in varying situations
■ Reality testing: perception of a situation
460
■ Coping abilities: ego strengths
■ Capacity for relating to others
The goal is to maintain and enhance the ego’s control and
management of stress and its effects.
Object Relations Theory
328
Object relations theory, which was a focus of Margaret Mahler’s work, is
centered on relationships with others. According to this theory, lifelong
relationship skills are strongly rooted in early attachments with parents,
especially mothers. Objects refer to people, parts of people, or physical
items that symbolically represent either a person or part of a person.
Object relations, then, are relationships to those people or items.
329
461
462
463
COGNITIVE AND BEHAVIORAL INTERVENTIONS
Cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) is a hands-on, practical approach to
problem solving. Its goal is to change patterns of thinking or behavior that
are responsible for clients’ difficulties, and so change the way they feel.
CBT works by changing clients’ attitudes and their behavior by focusing
on the thoughts, images, beliefs, and attitudes that are held (cognitive
processes) and how this relates to behavior, as a way of dealing with
emotional problems.
CBT can be thought of as a combination of psychotherapy and
behavioral therapy. Psychotherapy emphasizes the importance of the
personal meaning placed on things and how thinking patterns begin in
childhood. Behavioral therapy pays close attention to the relationship
between problems, behaviors, and thoughts.
This approach is active, collaborative, structured, time limited, goal
oriented, and problem focused. This approach lends itself to the
requirements posed by managed care companies, including brief
treatment, well-delineated techniques, goal and problem oriented, and
empirically supported evidence of its effectiveness.
Steps in Cognitive Restructuring
Assist clients in:
464
1. Accepting that their self-statements, assumptions, and belie
determine or govern their emotional reaction to life’s events
2. Identifying dysfunctional beliefs and patterns of thoughts that under
their problems
3. Identifying situations that evoke dysfunctional cognitions
4. Substituting functional self-statements in place of self-defeati
thoughts
5. Rewarding themselves for successful coping efforts
Foundational to this treatment is client self-monitoring. Clients are
encouraged to pay attention to any subtle shift in feelings. Clients
frequently keep thought or emotion logs that include three
330
components: (a) disturbing emotional states (b) the exact behaviors
engaged in at the time of the emotional states and (c) thoughts that
occurred when the emotions emerged. Homework is often done between
sessions to record these encounters.
STRENGTHS-BASED AND EMPOWERMENT STRATEGIES
AND INTERVENTIONS
The primary mission of the social work profession is to enhance human
well-being and help meet the basic human needs of all people, with
particular attention to the needs and empowerment of people who are
vulnerable, oppressed, and living in poverty (NASW Code of Ethics—
Preamble).
Empowerment aims to ensure a sense of control over well-being and
that change is possible. A social worker can help to empower individuals,
groups, communities, and institutions.
On an individual level, social workers can engage in a process with a
client aimed at strengthening self-worth by making a change in life that is
based on personal desires (self-determination).
To facilitate empowerment, a social worker should:
■ Establish a relationship aimed at meeting a client’s needs and wish
such as access to social services and benefits or to other sources
information.
■ Educate a client to improve skills, thereby increasing the ability for se
465
help.
■ Help a client to secure resources, such as those from oth
organizations or agencies, as well as natural support networks, to me
needs.
■ Unite a client with others who are experiencing the same issues wh
needed to enable social and political action.
Social workers should also use an empowerment process with groups,
communities, and institutions so they may gain or regain the capacity to
meet human needs, enhance overall well-being and potential, and provide
individuals control over their lives to the extent possible.
A social worker needs many skills that focus on the activation of
resources, the creation of alliances, and the expansion of opportunities in
order to facilitate empowerment.
CLIENT/CLIENT SYSTEM CONTRACTING AND GOAL-
SETTING TECHNIQUES
A social worker and client work together to develop a contract
(intervention or service plan), including an agreement on its
implementation or the activities used to help a client attain identified goals.
Modification of the contract may be required as new information about a
client’s situation emerges and/or as the situation changes.
When clients seek to attain their goals, changes may need to be made
to themselves, groups, families, and/or systems in the larger environment.
This choice of targets is an even more complex issue than it first appears
because the process of changing one system may bring about changes in
others.
Change Strategies
331
■ Modify systems: The decision to help a client on a one-to-one basis
in the context of a larger system must take into consideration a clien
preferences and previous experiences, as well as the degree to whi
a client’s problem is a response to forces within the larger system a
whether change can be readily attained by a change in the larg
system.
■ Modify individual thoughts: A social worker may teach how to proble
466
solve, alter self-concepts by modifying self-defeating statemen
and/or make interpretations to increase a client’s understanding abo
the relationship between events in the client’s life.
■ Modify individual actions: A social worker may use behav
modification techniques, such as reinforcement, punishment, modelin
role playing, and/or task assignments. Modeling and role modeling a
very effective methods for teaching. They should be used whenev
possible.
■ Thoughts can be modified by feedback from others and behaviors ca
be modified through the actions of others in a system (by alteri
reinforcements).
■ A social worker can also advocate for a client and seek to secure
change in a system on the client’s behalf.
■ A social worker can be a mediator by helping a client and anoth
individual or system to negotiate with each other so that each m
attain their respective goals.
PARTIALIZING TECHNIQUES
During the problem-solving process, a social worker may need to assist a
client to break down problems or goals into less overwhelming and more
manageable components. This is known as partialization and aims to
break complex issues into simpler ones.
Partialization is useful because it may assist a social worker and a
client to identify the goals that are easier to achieve first, enabling a client
to see results more quickly and gain some success in making harder
changes. Partialization can also help individuals to order the problems or
goals that need more immediate help from those that can be addressed
later. A social worker can use Maslow’s hierarchy of needs as one tool to
assist in making decisions about more pressing needs. In addition, a client
should be asked to prioritize concerns or goals.
When outlining the goals for treatment, it is important that the broad
overarching aims of treatment are broken down by a social worker and
client into smaller, more tangible items that must be achieved in order to
reach the overall goal. Behavioral objectives are the smaller, observable,
and measurable intermediate steps that lead to broader long-term goals.
Behavioral objectives help a social worker and client understand whether
467
the strategies they are using to achieve the goal are resulting in change or
whether they need to modify their efforts to improve the likelihood of
accomplishing the desired outcome.
There are several important elements of behavioral objectives:
332
1. Good behavioral objectives are client-oriented and place the emphas
upon what a client will need to do in order for change to occur.
2. Good behavioral objectives are clear and understandable and conta
a clearly stated verb that describes a definite action or behavior.
3. Good behavioral objectives are observable and describe an action th
results in observable products.
4. Good behavioral objectives contain the behavior targeted for chang
conditions under which a behavior will be performed, and the crite
for determining when the acceptable performance of the behavi
occurs.
ASSERTIVENESS TRAINING
Assertiveness training is when procedures are used to teach clients how
to express their positive and negative feelings and to stand up for their
rights in ways that will not alienate others.
Assertiveness training typically begins with clients thinking about
areas in their life in which they have difficulty asserting themselves. The
next stage usually involves role plays designed to help clients practice
clearer and more direct forms of communicating with others. Feedback is
provided to improve responses, and the role play is repeated. Clients are
asked to practice assertive techniques in everyday life.
Assertiveness training promotes the use of “I” statements as a way to
help clients express their feelings. “I” statements tell others how their
actions may cause clients to be upset, but are in contrast with “you”
statements, which are often seen as blaming or aggressive.
Learning specific techniques and perspectives, such as self-
observation skills, awareness of personal preferences, and assuming
personal responsibility, are important components of the assertiveness
training process.
TASK-CENTERED APPROACHES
468
A task-centered approach aims to quickly engage clients in the problem-
solving process and to maximize their responsibility for treatment
outcomes. In this modality, the duration of treatment is usually limited due
to setting constraints, limitations imposed by third-party payers, or other
reasons. Thus, at the outset, the expectation is that interventions from
learning theory and behavior modification will be used to promote
completion of a well-defined task to produce measurable outcomes. The
focus is on the “here and now.” This type of practice is often preferred by
clients, as they are able to see more immediate results.
The problem is partialized into clearly delineated tasks to be addressed
consecutively (assessment leads to goals, which lead to tasks). A client
must be able to identify a precise psychosocial problem and a solution
confined to a specific change in behavior or a change of circumstances. A
client must also be willing to work on the problem. It is essential that a
social worker and client establish a strong working relationship quickly.
333
A social worker’s therapeutic style must be highly active, empathic,
and sometimes directive in this approach.
Assessment focuses on helping a client identify the primary problem
and explore the circumstances surrounding the problem. Specific tasks
are expected to evolve from this process. Consideration is given to how a
client would ideally like to see the problem resolved. Termination, in this
modality, begins almost immediately upon the onset of treatment.
PSYCHOEDUCATION METHODS (E.G., ACKNOWLEDGING,
SUPPORTING, NORMALIZING)
One of the ways that social workers provide information to clients is
through psychoeducation. This model allows a social worker to provide
clients with information necessary to make informed decisions that will
allow them to reach their respective goals. In addition to focusing on
clients’ education, it also provides support and coping skills development.
Psychoeducation is delivered in many service settings and with many
types of client populations. It is provided to those who are experiencing
some sort of issue or problem with the rationale that, with a clear
understanding of the problem, as well as self-knowledge of strengths,
community resources, and coping skills, clients are better equipped to
deal with problems and to contribute to their emotional well-being.
The core psychoeducational principle is that education has a role in
emotional and behavioral change. With an improved understanding of the
469
causes and effects of problems, psychoeducation broadens clients’
perception and interpretation of them, positively influencing clients’
emotions and behavior. In other words, clients feel less helpless about the
situation and more in control of themselves.
GROUP WORK TECHNIQUES AND APPROACHES (E.G.,
DEVELOPING AND MANAGING GROUP PROCESSES AND
COHESION)
Group work is a method of working with two or more people for personal
growth, the enhancement of social functioning, and/or for the achievement
of socially desirable goals.
Social workers use their knowledge of group organization and
functioning to affect the performance and adjustment of individuals.
Individuals remain the focus of concern and the group is the vehicle of
growth and change. When individual problems arise, they should be
directed to the group for possible solutions as the group is the agent of
change. Social workers must remind group members that confidentiality
cannot be guaranteed—though seeing an agreement among group
members concerning preserving the confidentiality of information shared
should be an initial goal of any group process.
Contraindications for group: client who is in crisis; suicidal;
compulsively needy for attention; actively psychotic; and/or paranoid
There are different kinds of groups.
Open Versus Closed
Open groups are those in which new members can join at any time.
Closed groups are those in which all members begin the group at the
same time.
Short-Term Versus Long-Term
334
Some groups have a very short duration, whereas others meet for a
longer duration.
A social worker takes on different roles throughout the group process,
which has a beginning, middle, and end.
Beginning
470
A social worker identifies the purpose of the group and the social worker’s
role. This stage is characterized as a time to convene, to organize, and to
set a plan. Members are likely to remain distant or removed until they
have had time to develop relationships.
Middle
Almost all of the group’s work will occur during this stage. Relationships
are strengthened as a group so that the tasks can be worked on. Group
leaders are usually less involved.
End
The group reviews its accomplishments. Feelings associated with the
termination of the group are addressed.
FAMILY THERAPY MODELS, INTERVENTIONS, AND
APPROACHES
Working with families has always been central to social work practice.
Family interventions require treating not just an individual but all those
within a family unit, with the focus of assessment and intervention directed
at the interaction of family members.
In order to work effectively with families, social workers must:
1. Understand the development of, as well as the historical, conceptu
and contextual issues influencing, family functioning.
2. Have awareness of the impact of diversity in working with familie
particularly race, class, culture, ethnicity, gender, sexual preferenc
aging, and disabilities.
3. Understand the impact of a social worker’s family of origin, curre
family structure, and its influence on a social worker’s interventio
with families.
4. Be aware of the needs of families experiencing unique family problem
(domestic violence, blended families, trauma and loss, adopti
families, etc.).
Social workers use a variety of techniques to work with families.
Family therapy treats the family as a unified whole—a system of
471
interacting parts in which change in any part affects the functioning of the
overall system. The family is the unit of attention for diagnosis and
treatment. Social roles and interpersonal interaction are the focus of
treatment. Real behaviors and communication that affect current life
situations are addressed. The goal is to interrupt the circular pattern of
pathological communication and behaviors and replace it with a new
pattern that will sustain itself without the dysfunctional aspects of the
original pattern.
Key clinical issues include:
335
■ Establishing a contract with the family
■ Examining alliances within the family
■ Identifying where power resides
■ Determining the relationship of each family member to the problem
■ Seeing how the family relates to the outside world
■ Assessing influence of family history on current family interactions
■ Ascertaining communication patterns
■ Identifying family rules that regulate patterns of interaction
■ Determining meaning of presenting symptom in maintaining fam
homeostasis
■ Examining flexibility of structure and accessibility of alternative actio
patterns
■ Finding out about sources of external stress and support
Recognition of Functional Roles in Family Dynamics
Roles are extremely important in family functioning, with the establishment
of clear roles directly connected to family well-being and the ability to
handle crises.
Family members have both instrumental and affective functions that
are essential for positive well-being. Instrumental functions are concerned
with the provision of physical resources (i.e., food, clothing, and shelter)
and decision making. Affective functions involve the provision of emotional
support to family members.
472
In order for families to maintain emotional and physical health, family
members must fulfill essential roles. Sometimes these roles are assumed
by multiple family members; in other instances, separate family members
may meet each of these needs. Often individuals have multiple roles
within family units.
Roles in Healthy Families
Provision of Resources
The provision of resources is an instrumental role that fulfills the most
basic needs of the family unit: having money, food, clothing, and shelter.
Emotional Support
Supporting other family members is primarily an affective role and
includes providing comfort and support.
Life Skills Development
One of the functions of families is the physical, emotional, educational,
and social development of children. This role ensures that life skills
development of members occurs.
Family System Management
Decision making, handling finances, and maintaining appropriate
boundaries and behavioral standards are critical to maintaining a healthy
family dynamic.
Intimate Relationship Maintenance
336
Intimate relationships, including sexual ones, are critical between
partners and couples. Ensuring that quality intimate relationships are
maintained is essential to meeting the emotional needs of partners and
spouses.
In dysfunctional families, such as those with members who have
substance use problems, members may assume codependent roles,
including functioning as the Family Hero, the Scapegoat, the Mascot,
and/or the Lost Child.
The Family Hero, often the oldest child, devotes time and attention to
minimizing or masking problems. By overachieving and being successful
in school or work, the Family Hero tries to make up for a dysfunctional
home life.
473
The Scapegoat is defiant, hostile, and angry, and gets in trouble at
school or work. The behavior turns the focus away from dysfunction in the
family.
The Mascot tries to get people to laugh as a way of improving the
atmosphere and drawing attention away from the dysfunctional
household.
The Lost Child becomes a loner or is very shy. The Lost Child draws
away from interactions with family members and becomes invisible in
order to avoid adding to the dysfunction or stain.
The following are some types of family therapy.
Strategic Family Therapy
In strategic family therapy, a social worker initiates what happens during
therapy, designs a specific approach for each person’s presenting
problem, and takes responsibility for directly influencing people.
It has roots in structural family therapy and is built on communication
theory.
It is active, brief, directive, and task-centered. Strategic family therapy
is more interested in creating change in behavior than change in
understanding.
Strategic family therapy is based on the assumption that families are
flexible enough to modify solutions that do not work and adjust or develop.
There is the assumption that all problems have multiple origins; a
presenting problem is viewed as a symptom of and a response to current
dysfunction in family interactions.
Therapy focuses on problem resolution by altering the feedback cycle
or loop that maintains the symptomatic behavior. The social worker’s task
is to formulate the problem in solvable, behavioral terms and to design an
intervention plan to change the dysfunctional family pattern.
Concepts/Techniques
■ Pretend technique—encourage family members to “pretend” a
encourage voluntary control of behavior
■ First-order changes—superficial behavioral changes within a syste
that do not change the structure of the system
■ Second-order changes—changes to the systematic interaction patte
474
so the system is reorganized and functions more effectively
■
Family homeostasis—families tend to preserve familiar
337
organization and communication patterns; resistant to change
■ Relabeling—changing the label attached to a person or problem fro
negative to positive so the situation can be perceived differently; it
hoped that new responses will evolve
■ Paradoxical directive or instruction—prescribe the symptoma
behavior so a client realizes control over it; uses the strength of t
resistance to change in order to move a client toward goals
Structural Family Therapy
This approach stresses the importance of family organization for the
functioning of the group and the well-being of its members. A social
worker “joins” (engages) the family in an effort to restructure it. Family
structure is defined as the invisible set of functional demands organizing
interaction among family members. Boundaries and rules determining
who does what, where, and when are crucial in three ways.
1. Interpersonal boundaries define individual family members a
promote their differentiation and autonomous, yet interdependen
functioning. Dysfunctional families tend to be characterized by either
pattern of rigid enmeshment or disengagement.
2. Boundaries with the outside world define the family unit, b
boundaries must be permeable enough to maintain a well-functioni
open system, allowing contact and reciprocal exchanges with t
social world.
3. Hierarchical organization in families of all cultures is maintained
generational boundaries, the rules differentiating parent and ch
roles, rights, and obligations.
Restructuring is based on observing and manipulating interactions
within therapy sessions, often by enactments of situations as a way to
understand and diagnose the structure and provide an opportunity for
restructuring.
Bowenian Family Therapy
475
Unlike other models of family therapy, the goal of this approach is not
symptom reduction. Rather, a Bowenian-trained social worker is
interested in improving the intergenerational transmission process. Thus,
the focus within this approach is consistent whether a social worker is
working with an individual, a couple, or the entire family. It is assumed that
improvement in overall functioning will ultimately reduce a family
member’s symptomatology. Eight major theoretical constructs are
essential to understanding Bowen’s approach. These concepts are
differentiation, emotional fusion, multigenerational transmission, emotional
triangle, nuclear family, family projection process, sibling position, and
societal regression. These constructs are interconnected.
Differentiation is the core concept of this approach. The more
differentiated, the more a client can be an individual while in
emotional contact with the family. This allows a client to think through
a situation without being drawn to act by either internal or external
emotional pressures.
Emotional fusion is the counterpart of differentiation and
338
refers to the tendency for family members to share an emotional
response. This is the result of poor interpersonal boundaries between
family members. In a fused family, there is little room for emotional
autonomy. If a member makes a move toward autonomy, it is
experienced as abandonment by other members of the family.
Multigenerational transmission stresses the connection of
current generations to past generations as a natural process.
Multigenerational transmission gives the present a context in history.
This context can focus a social worker on the differentiation in the
system and on the transmission process.
An emotional triangle is the network of relationships among
three people. Bowen’s theory states that a relationship can remain
stable until anxiety is introduced. However, when anxiety is
introduced into the dyad, a third party is recruited into a triangle to
reduce the overall anxiety. It is almost impossible for two people to
interact without triangulation.
The nuclear family is the most basic unit in society and there is a
concern over the degree to which emotional fusion can occur in a
family system. Clients forming relationships outside of the nuclear
family tend to pick mates with the same level of differentiation.
476
Family projection process describes the primary way parents
transmit their emotional problems to children. The projection process
can impair child functioning and increase vulnerability to clinical
symptoms.
Sibling position is a factor in determining personality. Where a
client is in birth order has an influence on how the client relates to
parents and siblings. Birth order determines the triangles that clients
grow up in.
Societal regression, in contrast to progression, is manifested by
problems such as the depletion of natural resources. Bowen’s theory
can be used to explain societal anxieties and social problems,
because Bowen viewed society as a family—an emotional system
complete with its own multigenerational transmission, chronic anxiety,
emotional triangles, cutoffs, projection processes, and
fusion/differentiation struggles.
COUPLES INTERVENTIONS AND TREATMENT
APPROACHES
There are often reasons that couples experience problems including, but
not limited to:
■ Retriggering emotional trauma and not repairing it
■ An inability to bond or reconnect after hurting or doing damage to o
another
■ Lack of skills or knowledge
Many treatment techniques are used with individuals that can be
adapted in work with couples, including:
Behavior modification—Successful couples counseling methods will
address and attempt to modify any dysfunctional behavior so that couples
can change the way each individual behaves with the other.
Insight-oriented psychotherapy—A good deal of time is spent studying
339
interactions between individuals in order to develop a hypothesis
concerning what caused individuals to react to each other in the way they
do.
477
There are also specific couples therapy approaches, including the
Gottman Method, which is based on the notion that healthy relationships
are ones in which individuals know each other’s stresses and worries,
share fondness and admiration, maintain a sense of positiveness,
manage conflicts, trust one another, and are committed to one another.
The Gottman Method focuses on conflicting verbal communication in
order to increase intimacy, respect, and affection; removes barriers that
create a feeling of stagnancy in conflicting situations; and creates a
heightened sense of empathy and understanding within relationships.
With all approaches, there are actions that a social worker can take to
facilitate effective couples’ treatment.
For example, when developing a collaborative alliance with each
person, a social worker should validate the experience of each and
explore each person’s reservations about engaging in couples therapy. In
addition, when developing an alliance with the couple as a unit, a social
worker can reframe individual problems in relationship terms and support
each person’s sense of self as being part of a unit, as well as a separate
individual.
PERMANENCY PLANNING
Permanency planning is an approach to child welfare that is based on the
belief that children need permanence to thrive. Child protection services
should focus on getting children into, and maintaining, permanent homes.
In permanency planning, the first goal is to get children back into their
original homes. This can be achieved with a thorough investigation into
child protection situations to determine if homes are safe and, if needed,
exploring ideas for making them safer or more enriching for children.
Supports can include getting caregivers services for meeting needs or
providing education, if needed, to ensure adequate and quality care. If
children cannot return to their original homes, steps need to be made so
that they can get into permanent living situations as quickly as possible
with adults with whom they have continuous and reciprocal relationships,
including those made available through adoption.
Family preservation helps keep families together and children out of
foster care or other out-of-home placements. Efforts focus on family
reunification or adoption if children are removed from homes. Plans for
children involved in protection services must be reviewed regularly and
“reasonable efforts” must be made to keep families together via
prevention and family reunification services. There are often financial
478
subsidies to assist with facilitating the adoption of children with complex
needs or disabilities.
MINDFULNESS AND COMPLEMENTARY THERAPEUTIC
APPROACHES
Social workers continue to provide the bulk of mental health services. A
significant number of persons seek services expecting providers to be
aware and knowledgeable about alternatives and complements to
340
Western medical approaches for symptom relief and healing when
their medical or behavioral health is disrupted and/or compromised. An
ever increasing number of people are seeking complementary and
alternative medicine (CAM) or integrated health care (IHC) to address
health/behavioral health issues. Not only are clients receptive to the use
of complementary approaches, they often request diverse approaches
that go beyond medications and psychotherapy to address their overall
concerns. Thus, social workers must have knowledge of mindfulness and
complementary therapeutic approaches.
Interventions and remedies that some cultures and populations
consider conventional, others view as alternative, and what some clients
assess as successful outcomes, some professionals may not concur.
Mindfulness is the practice of paying close attention to what is
being experienced in the present, both inside the body and mind and in
the external world. It is a conscious effort to be with whatever is going on
right now, without judging or criticizing what we find. In each moment,
mindfulness invites being awake, aware, and accepting of ourselves.
The practice of mindfulness is integral to efforts to reduce stress and
to increase capacity to cope. Mindfulness can stand alone as a treatment
tool or may be incorporated with other treatment modalities. Most settings
where social workers practice would be conducive to mindfulness
practice.
Social workers and other health/behavioral health providers are
increasingly including the practice of mindfulness as a useful tool, not only
in building a self-care routine, but also in addressing the needs of their
clients.
The multitude of complementary approaches to maintaining health are
vast and it is unrealistic for social workers to be informed and
knowledgeable about all of them, but it is expected that social workers will
be aware of the predominant practices and methods being used among
479
the populations they are serving. Just as important, social workers need to
be instilled with a respect for clients’ authority in determining the best
method to treat their problems when there are no indications of harm to
self and/or others. Knowing how to integrate empirically tested and
validated medical interventions, along with indigenous approaches
preserved for generations, is essential to ensuring culturally competent,
holistic treatment.
TECHNIQUES USED FOR FOLLOW-UP
The standard of practice is that social workers must involve clients and
their families (when appropriate) in making their own decisions about
follow-up services or aftercare. Involvement must include, at a minimum,
discussion of client and family preferences (when appropriate).
Follow-up meetings are often important to ensure change
maintenance. Many clients continue to progress after termination and
follow-up meetings provide opportunities to acknowledge these gains and
encourage continuation of such efforts.
Follow-up meetings also provide valuable interactions which can
mitigate any unanticipated difficulties. Follow-up meetings provide clients
with reassurance that they are not alone as they implement what they
have learned. They allow for longitudinal evaluation of practice
effectiveness.
It is important that social workers explain to clients that follow-up meetings
may be important in the problem-solving process. Social workers must not
be intrusive or send messages that clients cannot function on their own.
Clients who have difficulty terminating may use follow-up meetings as
341
ways to prolong social worker–client relationships beyond what is
needed. Social workers must set clear boundaries and treat follow-up
meetings with professionalism—having clearly stated goals for these
sessions.
Clients who tell social workers during follow-up about new problems
that have arisen should be seen for assessment. Social workers who have
already assisted clients resolve issues are often the first ones to which
clients disclose new problems which have emerged.
TIME MANAGEMENT APPROACHES
480
Time management is planning and consciously controlling the amount of
time spent on specific activities, especially to increase effectiveness,
efficiency, or productivity. Though time management initially focused on
business or work activities, it is now increasingly used to control personal
activities as well.
Most time management approaches focus on creating conducive or
effective environments, modifying behaviors, setting priorities, and/or
reducing time spent on nonpriorities.
The approaches to time management have evolved. Initially,
approaches consisted of checklists and notes to recognize the demands
on time. These then evolved into calendars and appointment books that
focused on looking ahead to anticipate future events. The third approach,
often used today, examines efficiency with the focus on prioritizing,
planning, controlling, and taking steps toward a goal.
The last approach requires the categorization of daily activities by
importance and urgency. Those activities that are urgent and important
can be stressful and require immediate action; those who deal with these
exclusively will think they are just “putting out fires.” Activities that are not
urgent or important require little or no attention, and time spent on these
activities will result in feelings of disengagement. Activities that are urgent
but not important often take up a lot of attention but tend to yield little
difference or progress. The last grouping—those things that are important
but not urgent—are likely to be put aside yet are critical to personal
fulfillment. Time management should include minimizing time spent on
activities that are not important and ensuring those that are not urgent but
are important, such as building relationships, recreation and leisure, and
so on, are also prioritized.
COMMUNITY ORGANIZING AND SOCIAL PLANNING
METHODS
Community organizing is focused on harnessing the collective power
of communities to tackle issues of shared concern. It challenges
government, corporations, and other power-holding institutions in an effort
to tip the power balance more in favor of communities.
It is essential for social workers to understand sources of power in
order to access them for the betterment of the community. Organizing
members to focus these sources of power on the problem(s) and
mobilizing resources to assist is critical.
481
Community organization enhances participatory skills of local citizens
by working with and not for them, thus developing leadership with
particular emphasis on the ability to conceptualize and act on problems. It
strengthens communities so they can better deal with future problems;
community members can develop the capacity to resolve problems.
Social planning is defined as the process by which a group or
342
community decides its goals and strategies relating to societal issues. It is
not an activity limited to government, but includes activities of the private
sector, social movements, professions, and other organizations focused
specifically on social objectives.
Models of social planning in social work practice include those that are
based on community participation. Rather than planning “for”
communities, social workers as planners engage “with” community
members. Social planning does not merely examine sociological problems
that exist, but also includes the physical and economic factors that relate
to societal issues.
All issues confronting those who are served by social workers are
really human or social issues. Social workers can help facilitate the
process of planning through all stages: organizing community members;
data-gathering related to the issue—including identifying economic,
political, and social causes; problem identification; weighing of
alternatives; policy/program implementation; and evaluation of
effectiveness.
METHODS TO DEVELOP AND EVALUATE MEASURABLE
OBJECTIVES FOR CLIENT/CLIENT SYSTEM INTERVENTION,
TREATMENT, AND/OR SERVICE PLANS
When social workers are creating intervention or service plans, it is
essential that goals are written in observable and measurable terms. In
order to achieve this aim, the following should be included in each goal
contained in the intervention or service plan.
■ Criteria: What behavior must be exhibited, how often, over what perio
of time, and under what conditions to demonstrate achievement of th
goal?
■ Method for evaluation: How will progress be measured?
■ Schedule for evaluation: When, how often, and on what dates
482
intervals of time will progress be measured?
There may also be benchmarks or the intermediate knowledge, skills,
and/or behaviors that must be learned/achieved in order for a client to
reach an ultimate goal.
Objectives break down the goals into discrete components or
subparts, which are steps toward the final desired outcome.
PRIMARY, SECONDARY, AND TERTIARY PREVENTION
STRATEGIES
There are three major types of prevention strategies—primary, secondary,
and tertiary. Optimally, all three types are needed to create
comprehensive strategies of prevention and protection.
Primary Prevention
The goal is to protect people from developing a disease, experiencing an
injury, or engaging in a behavior in the first place.
Examples:
343
■ Immunizations against disease
■ Education promoting the use of automobile passenger restraints a
bicycle helmets
■ Screenings for the general public to identify risk factors for illness
■ Controlling hazards in the workplace and home
■ Regular exercise and good nutrition
■ Counseling about the dangers of tobacco and other drugs
Since successful primary prevention helps avoid the disease, injury, or
behavior and its associated suffering, cost, and burden, it is typically
considered the most cost-effective.
Secondary Prevention
Secondary prevention occurs after a disease, injury, or illness has
occurred. It aims to slow the progression or limit the long-term impacts. It
483
is often implemented when asymptomatic, but risk factors are present.
Secondary prevention also may focus on preventing reinjury.
Examples:
■ Telling those with heart conditions to take daily, low-dose aspirin
■ Screenings for those with risk factors for illness
■ Modifying work assignments for injured workers
Tertiary Prevention
Tertiary prevention focuses on managing complicated, long-term
diseases, injuries, or illnesses. The goal is to prevent further deterioration
and maximize quality of life because disease is now established and
primary prevention activities have been unsuccessful. However, early
detection through secondary prevention may have minimized the impact
of the disease.
Examples:
■ Pain management groups
■ Rehabilitation programs
■ Support groups
THE INDICATORS OF CLIENT/CLIENT SYSTEM READINESS
FOR TERMINATION
Readiness for termination may be marked when meetings between a
social worker and client seem uneventful and the tone becomes one
closer to cordiality rather than challenge, as well as when no new ground
has been discovered for several sessions in a row.
In termination, a social worker and client (a) evaluate the degree to
344
which a client’s goals have been attained, (b) acknowledge and
address issues related to the ending of the relationship, and (c) plan for
subsequent steps a client may take relevant to the problem that do not
involve a social worker (such as seeking out new services, if necessary).
The process of evaluation helps a client determine if goals have been
met and if the helping relationship was beneficial. As a result of the
484
evaluation process, a social worker can become a more effective
practitioner and provide better services. There must always be a method
to evaluate the effectiveness of the services received. Evaluation
measures, when compared with those taken at baseline, assist in
determining the extent of progress and a client’s readiness for termination.
A social worker helps a client cope with the feelings associated with
termination. This process may help a client cope with future terminations.
By identifying the changes accomplished and planning how a client is
going to cope with challenges in the future, a social worker helps a client
maintain these changes.
485
CHAPTER345
9
Service Delivery and
Management of Cases
THE EFFECTS OF POLICIES, PROCEDURES,
REGULATIONS, AND LEGISLATION ON SOCIAL WORK
PRACTICE AND SERVICE DELIVERY
Client functioning must be viewed using a “person-in-environment”
(PIE) perspective. The “rules” that govern society are critical to the way
in which the environment is structured, operates, and changes. They
can both facilitate and hinder client functioning across time. Social
workers can think of clients as part of a larger system with many layers
of influence. Clients are most immediately impacted by their families,
who are members of neighborhoods and communities. However, each
of these contextual influences—families, neighborhood, and
communities—are affected by state, national, and international forces,
such as policies, procedures, regulations, and laws. They dictate who
may be eligible for programs, the amount of funding received, and/or
which programs are established or eliminated.
Their influence is dynamic because, using a systems perspective,
changes to any one “rule” impacts all others. The creation or
modification of a societal “rule” also impacts on individuals, and vice
versa.
At different times, state, national, and international forces may be
more or less prominent. For example, international policies may
influence businesses and communities because multinational
corporations make decisions about job location, outsourcing, and other
486
restructuring. In addition, international unrest may restrict travel to other
countries. Thus, policies, procedures, regulations, and laws at different
levels interact with one another and can create both the opportunities
and the barriers for clients in their family units, neighborhoods, and
communities.
Social workers must be aware of this dynamic and the relationship
of “rules” on client functioning, as well as their own professional
practice, to make sure that they are delivering effective and efficient
services to clients in accordance with existing rules and best practices.
Many laws affect social work practice. Although social workers may
not be responsible for implementing these pieces of legislation, they
provide protections or programs that are critical to those served. Social
workers are also expected to keep up-to-date with new public laws and
policies.
For example, social workers must be familiar with and fully informed of
policies, procedures, regulations, and legislation related to
confidentiality, living wills/advance directives, special education
346
services, child abuse and neglect, discrimination, public
benefits/welfare, disability rights and accommodations, domestic
violence, and other special populations or areas of practice.
Policies, procedures, regulations, and legislation shape practice
and service delivery as they exert influence on the social contexts of
clients and delivery systems. Policies can optimize or hinder well-being.
There are unintended consequences of policies, procedures,
regulations, and legislation that are not anticipated and can adversely
impact clients and the delivery of social services. Social workers are
uniquely positioned to identify policies that promote relationships and
improve the well-being of those who may be marginalized or
oppressed.
Clients’ lives are directly impacted by policies, procedures,
regulations, and legislation in systems such as child protection, criminal
justice, and/or mental health. Social workers need to be aware of the
laws that regulate each system in order to help clients navigate their
way through these systems more effectively, and to be able to
advocate for reform to improve the goodness of fit between clients and
their socio-legal environments.
Policies, procedures, regulations, and legislation govern many
relationships of interest to social work clients, including landlord/tenant,
487
employer/employee, physician/patient, spouse/spouse, and
parent/child relationships. Thus, knowledge of policies, procedures,
regulations, and legislation, as well as their effects, provides social
workers with an understanding of their clients’ rights and
responsibilities in a broad range of social relationships.
Social work is rooted in strong assumptions about rights, fairness,
and justice. A focus on poverty and other sources of adversity are
essential to eliminating disparities and improving well-being. Social
justice is a necessary value for social work practice, research, and
pedagogy. Social welfare policies may be an effective means to
accomplish this aim.
Policies, procedures, regulations, and legislation are important
mechanisms for promoting justice and ultimately health. Advocacy is
needed to ensure that the rights of those who may not have power or
privilege are respected.
Social workers serve clients in hospitals, schools, correctional
facilities, mental health agencies, and other settings. Policies,
procedures, regulations, and legislation dictate who is eligible for
services, standards for record keeping, confidentiality, and other client
rights. Social workers need to understand policies, procedures,
regulations, and legislation to ensure that agencies are in compliance
with them. Social work must advocate for changes in these settings to
promote greater social and economic justice.
Social work practice itself is regulated by policies, procedures,
regulations, and legislation. Most states/jurisdictions have licensing or
accreditation laws that regulate the practice of social work, including
who may practice and what standards of practice are legally
enforceable. Social workers must be aware of malpractice laws that
identify when they may be legally responsible for causing harm to
clients if they perform their professional duties in a manner that falls
below a reasonable standard of care.
THE IMPACT OF THE POLITICAL ENVIRONMENT ON
POLICY-MAKING
Social work is unique in its dual focus on assisting clients on an
individual level while also working to change the policies that adversely
impact them. The personal troubles of clients are linked to the
347
488
public policies which can help to prevent or address them. Social
workers are charged with working with and helping individuals and their
families directly, but also working within decision-making bodies to
promote these policies.
Social workers must be knowledgeable about the political
environment if they are to shape public policy based upon the core
values of the profession. As there are always competing interest
groups who would like to influence policy-makers in their favor, political
advocacy is seen as an important and necessary skill.
Advocacy can be defined as attempting to influence public policy
through education, lobbying, or political pressure. Social workers are
often called upon to educate the general public as well as public policy-
makers about the nature of problems, the legislation needed to address
problems, and the funding required to provide services or conduct
research.
Social workers should engage in social and political action that
seeks to ensure that all people have equal access to the resources,
employment, services, and opportunities they require to meet their
basic human needs and to develop to their full potential. They should
be aware of the impact of the political arena on practice and should
advocate for changes in policy and legislation to improve social
conditions in order to meet basic human needs and promote social
justice (NASW Code of Ethics—Social and Political Action).
THEORIES AND METHODS OF ADVOCACY FOR POLICIES,
SERVICES, AND RESOURCES TO MEET CLIENTS’/CLIENT
SYSTEMS’ NEEDS
Advocacy is one of a social worker’s most important tasks. Social
workers may advocate when working with an individual client to ensure
that the client’s needs are met. However, social workers have an
ethical mandate to make systemic changes to address the problems
experienced by groups of individuals who are vulnerable and/or who
are unable to speak for themselves.
A social worker may engage in advocacy by convincing others of
the legitimate needs and rights of members of society. Such work can
occur on the local, county, state, or national levels. Some social
489
workers are even involved in international human rights and advocacy
for those in need in other countries.
Fundamental to social work is advocating to change the factors that
create and contribute to problems.
Sometimes advocacy can be achieved by working through the
problem-solving process as it relates to a problem, including
acknowledging the problem, analyzing and defining the problem,
generating possible solutions, evaluating each option, implementing the
option of choice, and evaluating the outcomes.
In other instances, social workers may engage in obtaining
legislative support or using the media to draw attention to a concern.
In all instances, social workers should be working with clients to
have their voices heard and should not be speaking for them. Often
social workers need to help clients to advocate with third-party payers
to have their needs met when resources are not adequate. Social
workers must inform clients of appeal processes when services are
denied and support them as they advocate to meet their needs. When
clients feel that they have not been treated fairly, social workers should
empower them by providing education about appeal processes and
other methods to change policies, fix services, and/or increase services
to meet their needs.
The goal of social work advocacy is to assist clients to strengthen
348
their own skills in this area. Social workers may assist by locating
sources of power that can be shared with clients to make changes.
METHODS OF SERVICE DELIVERY
The context of social work practice clearly has a profound influence on
the quality and standards of professional activities and the ability of
social workers to practice ethically and effectively. Social work takes
place in a wide variety of settings, including, but not limited to, private
practices, public sector organizations (government), schools, hospitals,
correctional facilities, and private nonprofit agencies.
To meet the needs of clients, social workers must have work
environments that support ethical practice and are committed to
standards and good-quality services. A positive working environment is
created where the values and principles of social workers are
reinforced in agency policies and procedures.
490
To achieve this aim, employers must understand social work
practice and provide supervision, workload management, and
continuing professional development consistent with best practices.
Policies setting out standards of ethical practice should be written
and clear. Social workers should never be required to do anything that
would put at risk their ability to uphold ethical standards, including
those in the areas of confidentiality, informed consent, and safety/risk
management.
The public, including clients, should be regularly informed of agency
policies and procedures and provided with information about how to
raise concerns or make complaints about them.
Policies that do not tolerate dangerous, discriminatory, and/or
exploitative behavior must be in place so that social workers and their
clients are safe from harm.
The adoption and implementation of policies and procedures on
workload and caseload management contribute greatly to the provision
of quality services to clients. In addition, policies and procedures for
confidential treatment and storage of records should be established.
Continuing professional development and further training enable
social workers to strengthen and develop their skills. Orientation and
other relevant training provided to social workers upon hire and when
assuming other jobs within the setting are essential.
Good quality, regular social work supervision by professionals who
have the necessary experience and qualifications in social work
practice is a critical tool to ensure service quality.
Rates of pay for social workers need to be comparable with similar
professionals, and the skill and qualifications of social workers must be
recognized, while ensuring services are affordable to clients.
THE COMPONENTS OF CASE MANAGEMENT
Case management has been defined in many ways. However, all
models are based on the belief that clients often need assistance in
accessing services in today’s complex systems, as well as the need to
monitor duplication and gaps in treatment and care.
Although there may be many federal, state, and local programs
349
available, there are often serious service gaps. A client might have
a specific need met in one program and many related needs ignored
491
because of the lack of coordination. Systems are highly complex,
fragmented, duplicative, and uncoordinated.
Social workers provide case management services to different
client populations in both nonprofit and for-profit settings.
The primary goal of social work case management is to optimize
client functioning and well-being by providing and coordinating high-
quality services, in the most effective and efficient manner possible, to
individuals with multiple complex needs.
Five case management activities are (a) assessment, (b) planning,
(c) linking, (d) monitoring, and (e) advocacy.
Fragmentation presents one of the biggest service delivery
challenges for clients and those who are assisting them, such as social
workers. Clients can fall through the cracks because the connections
between services are either absent or problematic, or needed services
are missing altogether.
The purpose of coordinating services for clients is to improve
outcomes. The assumption is that collaborative activity can facilitate
access to services, reduce unnecessary duplication of effort, and
produce a more effective and efficient social service system.
Social workers are uniquely positioned to coordinate services.
Coordination is achieved through the integration of services in
which services are combined and provided simultaneously. Such an
approach is often used with mental health and substance use
interventions in which they are combined within a primary treatment
relationship or service setting.
Another method of coordination is wrap-around services in which
multiple providers and services may overlap in some ways, but are not
combined to the same degree as integrated services.
In addition, “round tables” or interdisciplinary team approaches also
are useful in ensuring that all professionals are brought together to stay
informed of total client care and work together to avoid fragmentation
and/or duplication.
THE PRINCIPLES OF CASE RECORDING,
DOCUMENTATION, AND MANAGEMENT OF PRACTICE
RECORDS
492
Documentation in social work practice is critical because it forms the
basis of assessment, planning, intervention, and evaluation of services.
It is used to memorialize what has occurred and to hold social workers
accountable for their services to clients, third-party payers, employers,
and others. It also is used for supervision to ensure that clients receive
the most effective and efficient services possible. Social workers
should always document services appropriately and must never tamper
with or alter records to mislead, omit, or falsify information.
There are many issues with regard to the management of practice
records, including, but not limited to, that they have sufficient and
credible content, they are prepared and stored correctly, and they are
protected and accessed only by those who are authorized to do so. It is
essential that there are written protocols with regard to the
management of practice records and that these protocols are reviewed
and revised regularly. Training on these protocols should be regularly
conducted so that social workers know what is expected and how to
address routine situations, as well as those that are not anticipated,
350
such as the receipt of a subpoena or court order.
Management of practice records must be in accordance with all
laws and agency policies. Funders may also have requirements with
regard to necessary documentation and/or the retention of records.
Social workers should be knowledgeable about standards related to
practice records that appear in the NASW Code of Ethics.
Social workers should store records following the termination of
services to ensure reasonable future access and maintain them for the
number of years required by laws, agency policies, and contracts
(NASW Code of Ethics—Client Records).
The protection of confidential information requires great care. Social
workers should know the exceptions to confidentiality and how to
handle practice records when working with court-ordered clients or
those who are involved in divorce or child custody proceedings. Social
workers who are providing treatment to children whose parents are
divorced should be aware of legal custody determinations and the
respective rules that govern release of information in these
arrangements.
The proper documentation of client services is paramount to
competent practice. Without proper case recording or record keeping,
the quality of service may be compromised, the continuity of service
493
may be disrupted, there may be misinterpretation that can cause harm,
client confidentiality may be breached, and a client’s confidence in the
integrity of a social worker may be impacted.
In addition to client harm, a social worker, as well as the social
worker’s agency, if applicable, may be at risk of liability due to
malpractice, negligence, and/or breach of confidentiality.
In order to ensure that all communications are written in a
professional manner that will assist clients, social workers should
ensure that:
■ The purpose of the written communication is clear and concise
■ Arguments and opinions are logical, with recommendations w
supported
■ Client confidentiality is addressed ethically
■ Grammar is correct
■ Assessments and recommendations are not based on assumptio
or generalizations
■ The format is clear and headings are appropriate
■ The content is easily understood
■ Jargon is not included
■ Person-first language is used
■ Language is culturally appropriate
■ Content is based on value-free, objective descriptions
Written communications of social workers may be harmful to clients
if they are not prepared correctly with care and skill. Social workers
should understand the “audience” for documents that are prepared and
ensure that they are written so that they can be used effectively.
It should also include only information that is directly relevant to the
delivery of services.
The release and storage of case recordings is also critical. Social
workers must make sure that records are not released without proper
client consent and records are properly stored during and following
351
494
the termination of services. Records should be maintained for the
number of years required by laws, statutes, regulations, and relevant
contracts.
METHODS TO ESTABLISH SERVICE NETWORKS OR
COMMUNITY RESOURCES
The need for services to not be duplicative and complement one
another is central to meeting client needs. Social workers are often
called upon to assist with developing or navigating service networks, as
well as creating community resources where they are lacking.
Integrating services takes sustained effort and hard work. Though the
concept of service integration may seem simple, it is not and usually
takes several administrative and operational strategies. Strong
leadership and sound management are critical.
In order to effectively meet client needs, organizations are
increasingly recognizing collaborations, networks, alliances, and/or
partnerships. There are two distinct network forms—mandated network
arrangements and self-organizing networks.
Within each of these forms, there may be a lead organization or a
model in which all organizations share decision-making power. The
former is often associated with a centralized structure, whereas the
latter is more indicative of a decentralized one. Networks can also have
strong and weak arrangements in which the parameters of integration
may or may not be highly regulated.
The willingness and ability of social service organizations to form
networks often depends on organizational size, resource dependency,
and collaborative experience.
EMPLOYEE RECRUITMENT, TRAINING, RETENTION,
PERFORMANCE APPRAISAL, EVALUATION, AND
DISCIPLINE
Employment and human resources law can be very complicated. Social
work administrators should be familiar with federal, state, and local
regulations. They must ensure that human service organizations
operate legally and they must make ethical decisions with regard to
495
employee recruitment, training, retention, performance appraisal,
evaluation, and discipline. Social work administrators must also ensure
that employment policies and practices are not discriminatory based on
race, ethnicity, national origin, color, sex, sexual orientation, gender
identity or expression, age, marital status, political belief, religion,
immigration status, or mental or physical disability.
Employee recruitment can be difficult as it involves finding the best
candidates for positions. Bad recruitment practices may lead to
unqualified people being selected. Although there is no perfect method
for hiring, it is best to start well in advance of a hiring need. A pool of
candidates should be recruited using a detailed job description and an
established background check policy. Interviews should use standard
questioning which complies with legal and ethical standards.
Once hired, employees need to be initially trained and should
receive ongoing development opportunities to ensure that they have
the skills needed to fulfill the mission of an organization. There are
several options for training and education related to employees’ official
duties. These include doing training within an agency or having
employees go to other entities to be trained. Training may be paid
solely by an employer or an employee, or split between the two parties.
In addition, time spent in training may or may not be compensated by
an employer, depending upon the policy of an agency.
Once employees are hired and trained, retaining them should also
352
be a top priority. Many good retention practices are inexpensive to
implement. Employee retention is positively linked to career
development opportunities and a chance to advance within an agency,
opportunities for regular feedback and recognition, flexible work
schedules that recognize the need for work/life balance, and good
salaries and benefits.
Employee performance should be periodically evaluated to ensure
that employees are meeting expected standards, as well as to inform
them of their status. In order to ensure the delivery of effective and
efficient client services, social workers’ performance should be
reviewed and evaluated. Such reviews and evaluations should occur
regularly as part of the administrative task of supervision. Performance
appraisal should be both formal and informal so that employees can
get immediate feedback if they are doing something good or bad.
496
Evaluations provide information to facilitate sound administrative
decision making on employment matters (pay increases, promotions,
terminations), as well as contribute to social workers’ professional
development and job performance.
The most important objective, however, is to ultimately improve the
outcome of service delivery, thereby being accountable to a client and
the public at large.
Evaluations should include a review of both the quality and quantity
of the work performed. Some of the areas to be included in a social
work appraisal or evaluation are:
■ The ability to establish and maintain meaningful, effectiv
appropriately professional relationships with clients
■ Knowledge and skills (i.e., data-gathering, diagnost
treatment/intervention, interviewing, and recording skills)
■ Ability to adhere to agency objectives, policies, and procedures
■ Use of supervision
■ Staff and community relationships
■ Professional attributes and attitudes, including adherence to th
NASW Code of Ethics
■ Cultural awareness
Evaluations should identify both strengths and weaknesses and
should be specific and individualized. Evaluations should focus on
recurrent patterns of behavior, not atypical, isolated examples.
Supervisors should consider factors that may have affected
performance, such as a heavy caseload or the unavailability of needed
support.
Social workers are responsible for conducting evaluations on their
employees in a responsible and ethical manner. They also should
ensure that evaluations of their services are completed in order to
provide feedback on their work.
Supervisors should notify supervisees in advance of when evaluations
will occur, what information and standards will be used, who will see
the results, and how the results will be used. When conducting
497
evaluations, supervisors and supervisees should prepare by reviewing
all materials, including evaluation tools, supervision notes, and
employee reports. Supervisors and supervisees should have a chance
to discuss their perceptions, followed by written documentation of the
supervisee performance and suggestions for improvement. This
documentation should be given to the supervisee with the opportunity
for revision if the supervisor agrees with objections raised.
353
Objections that the supervisor does not accept should be
documented and placed in the supervisees file.
There are a number of evaluation formats/methods including, but
not limited to, the use of ordinal rating scales and evaluation outlines.
Supervisors need to be aware of and guard against biases, such as
a central tendency bias, halo effect, and leniency bias, which may
impact on ratings.
Positive reinforcement is a powerful force for employees who are
doing a good job. For problem employees, specific work-quality issues
can be pointed out. Evaluations should make employees feel
empowered, not micromanaged. After employees have been
evaluated, goals for development and/or improvement should be
established.
Sometimes discipline, including termination, becomes necessary.
Social work administrators must be knowledgeable about both laws
and agency policies that impact disciplinary actions. When employees
have performed illegal acts, termination is justified. Breaking agency
policies can also be grounds for termination. However, there are
situations where termination can be considered “wrongful” or
inappropriate, such as when an employee is fired for reporting
wrongdoing or for taking time off when covered by the Family Medical
Leave Act (FMLA).
CASE RECORDING FOR PRACTICE EVALUATION OR
SUPERVISION
Case records are often an excellent source of information for
evaluating the impacts of services. They are existing sources of data,
so there is no additional cost or time associated with their collection.
However, there are a few limitations. If looking at records completed by
multiple workers, there may be inconsistencies in recording styles or
498
details that may impact on the evaluation. Also, information of interest
may not be contained in the records; evaluations would need to be
limited to only information that is explicitly stated, which may not reflect
all progress that has been made.
In addition, the opinions about how a client views both the process
and outcome of service delivery are also critical and may not be fully
captured in the record. Ensuring that a client’s views are the center of
any practice evaluation is critical. Thus, a social worker may want to
use the case record as one source of information, but include others as
well, to ensure all aspects of a client’s care, including satisfaction with
services.
Social workers engaged in formal evaluation beyond that used to
determine individual client progress should obtain voluntary and written
informed consent from clients regarding the use of their records without
any penalty for refusal to participate or undue inducement to participate
(NASW Code of Ethics—Evaluation and Research).
Review of case records by supervisors is also essential. This review
will ensure that a social worker is documenting properly and recording
information in an unbiased manner. Clients must understand and
consent to supervisory review of records.
When reviewing information, supervisors should adhere to the
same standards of confidentiality as a social worker. The supervisor
should not review the records unless it is for the betterment of a client
and only within the supervisory context to ensure the quality of
services. If the supervisor is a consultant, a client must consent unless
there is a compelling need for such disclosure.
METHODS TO EVALUATE AGENCY PROGRAMS (E.G.,
NEEDS ASSESSMENT, FORMATIVE/SUMMATIVE
ASSESSMENT, COST-EFFECTIVENESS, COST-BENEFIT
ANALYSIS, OUTCOMES ASSESSMENT)
354
Program evaluation is the systematic assessment of the processes
and/or outcomes of a program with the intent of furthering its
development and improvement. There are many types of program
evaluation including, but not limited to, the following.
499
■ A cost-benefit analysis determines the financial costs
operating a program as compared with the fiscal benefits of
outcomes. A cost-benefit ratio is generated to determine whethe
and the extent to which, the costs exceed the benefits. Progra
decisions can be made to eliminate or modify the program (
reducing program expenditures) based upon the findings.
■ A cost-effectiveness analysis is similar to a cost-bene
analysis, but distinct. It considers the benefits that are not measure
in monetary terms, such as illnesses prevented and/or lives saved.
does not produce a cost-benefit ratio, but may focus on the mo
financially efficient way to achieve a defined outcome or the cost f
producing a specific nonmonetary outcome.
■ An outcomes assessment is the process of determinin
whether a program has achieved its intended goal(s). It involv
collecting evidence through assessment, analyzing the data, an
then using the findings to make programmatic changes if needed.
is an iterative process with continual feedback loops.
THE EFFECTS OF PROGRAM EVALUATION FINDINGS ON
SERVICES
One of the most significant benefits that a program evaluation
communicates is the need to make service improvements. Some
examples of improvements that may need to be made include:
■ Eliminating services that do not achieve program outcomes
■ Adding services that are better designed to achieve outcomes
■ Acquiring more adequate resources to support effective services
■ Targeting a different group of participants to receive services
Evaluation findings should be viewed and communicated as an
opportunity to make programs better. Evaluation results that indicate
the need for improvement should not be communicated as an
indictment of the failure of a program. Program evaluation findings
500
should be viewed with an excitement about the possibilities of
developing an even stronger set of service offerings and improving
already successful efforts. An action plan aimed at improvement should
be developed, based on evaluation results, and communicated widely
to key stakeholders.
QUALITY ASSURANCE, INCLUDING PROGRAM
REVIEWS AND AUDITS BY EXTERNAL SOURCES
355
Historically, quality assurance systems have focused on auditing
records to monitor and report on the extent of compliance with laws
and grant requirements. Usually a small number of quality assurance
staff within organizations focused on this auditing function, and their
reports often had minimal impact on the services delivered by the
agency.
Today, many agencies are developing systems that move beyond
compliance monitoring. These systems attempt to gather and assess a
range of information on quality, and they work to implement needed
improvements on an ongoing basis. As a way of differentiating these
efforts from traditional compliance monitoring, the new approaches are
often called continuous quality improvement systems. These systems
require that agencies adopt the following steps:
Step 1: Adopting outcomes and standards
Step 2: Incorporating quality assurance standards and processes
throughout their work
Step 3: Gathering data and information
Step 4: Analyzing data and information
Step 5: Using analyses and information to make improvements
Funders and accreditors support and encourage the move toward
continuous quality improvement processes. This new approach
improves upon compliance monitoring in three ways. First, quality
improvement programs are broader in scope, assessing practice and
outcomes, as well as compliance. Second, they attempt to use data,
information, and results to effect positive changes in policy and
practice, along with compliance with federal, state, and agency
501
requirements. Third, these programs engage a broad range of internal
and external partners in the quality improvement process, including top
managers, staff at all levels, clients, and other stakeholders.
356
502
CHAPTER357
10
Consultation and
Interdisciplinary Collaboration
LEADERSHIP AND MANAGEMENT TECHNIQUES
There are many different definitions of leadership and management,
with little consensus about the differences between the two terms.
However, there is agreement that successful organizations need both
good leadership and management. Some suggest that leadership can
be viewed as a subset of management because a leadership role is
inherent in a management position. Leadership is related to being
focused on the future, dealing with uncertainty and instability, and
prospectively considering the ways in which organizational operations
need to change. Leadership also includes initiating, sustaining, and
helping to maintain a certain amount of momentum through the change
process. Leaders must be attentive to and help to balance stability and
change. Management, on the other hand, focuses on efficiency,
effectiveness, and planning.
Social work leaders need management skills and social work
managers need leadership skills in order to be effective. The skill sets
of leaders focus on inspiration, transformation, empowerment, trust,
innovation, and creativity whereas managers are concerned with
performance, planning, accountability, monitoring, evaluation,
cooperation, and teamwork. Managers must govern resources and
oversee the tensions between controlling, rationing, and providing
needed services.
503
There is typically little distinction between managers and leaders
because leaders are often appointed to management positions. Thus,
managers and leaders within organizations are usually the same
individuals.
MODELS OF SUPERVISION AND CONSULTATION (E.G.,
INDIVIDUAL, PEER, GROUP)
There are many and varied supervision models, each with its own
benefits and limitations. In order for supervision to be effective, it is
necessary to take into account both the needs of social workers and
the requirements and constraints of organizations when considering the
model to be utilized.
Individual supervision has traditionally been the cornerstone of
358
professional skill development. Supervision can be provided in
groups, peer-led, or facilitated by professional leaders. Group and peer
supervision, as well as intensive consultation on a case-by-case basis,
are useful and less costly additions to individual supervision, but they
may be inadequate as substitutes for one-on-one support.
Individual
Benefits
■ Full attention on the skill development, strengths, challenges, an
professional enhancement of the individual supervisee
■ More time and potentially safer environment in which to explo
supervisee’s interpersonal dynamics with clients and the impact
the work (e.g., countertransference issues, secondary traum
compassion fatigue, burnout)
■ Less exposure to poor practices of peers, which could b
inappropriately modeled or interfere with supervision process
Challenges
■ Potential for supervisee to feel intimidated by the supervisor, with n
504
one else present to observe, or break up the intensity of the one-t
one focus
■ Costly and time consuming
■ No input from others outside the dyad
■ No opportunity for supervisee to compare self with others, or ga
support from peers
Peer Group
Benefits
■ Each group member can offer and receive wisdom, experience, an
ideas (i.e., enjoy both “teacher” and “student” roles)
■ Shared influence and responsibility regarding how the group is run
■ Avoids chance of getting stuck with an unwanted supervisor
■ Opportunities for personal growth via group dynamics
■ Participants as equals encourages lateral help and peer support
Challenges
■ Potential for unconscious designation of more experienced/skille
members as “de facto” supervisors
■
Success is dependent upon how group members exercise their
responsibilities
359
■ Mutual trust, openness, and respect are essential
■ Usually requires that groups remain closed, at least for a period
time
■ Competition, defensiveness, and criticism between peers can occu
■ Discussion frequency, depth, and intensity are limited by the tim
available and the number of members participating in the group
505
Facilitated Group
Benefits
■ Learning occurs from others’ practice examples and ways of workin
■ Self-confirmation occurs through giving feedback
■ Opportunities for role play and other action techniques are present
■ Less expensive and time consuming than individual supervision
■ Opportunities for personal growth via group dynamics
Challenges
■ Supervisor must be skilled in working systemically with groups an
must be able to facilitate while also supervising (dual tasks)
■ Supervisor’s anxiety about the supervisor’s own competence ma
pose a barrier, as there is greater exposure of the superviso
abilities and experience
■ Less time for each supervisee, as the group must balance the nee
of each member
■ Group needs to have a high level of trust in order for supervisees
feel safe
EDUCATIONAL COMPONENTS, TECHNIQUES, AND
METHODS OF SUPERVISION
There are three components of supervision—administrative,
educational, and supportive. Administrative supervision aims to ensure
that a social worker is accountable to the public as well as to
organizational policies. The major responsibility is to make sure that the
work is performed in an acceptable manner. Educational supervision
establishes a learning alliance between a supervisor and a social
worker with the aim of teaching new skills or refining existing ones.
506
Supportive supervision is focused on increasing performance by
decreasing job-related stress that interferes with functioning.
For a social worker to learn job-related material and develop as a
skilled professional, the social worker must make appropriate and
effective use of educational supervision. The educational component of
supervision is concerned with teaching a social worker what the social
worker needs to know in order to do the job and helping the social
worker through the learning process. In essence, the educational
component relates to the transmission of knowledge, skills, attitudes,
and values needed by social workers.
In order for learning to occur, a supervisee must be cooperative
360
(willing to work and learn new skills), willing to follow directions
(initially doing what is told until able to complete routines without
direction), and knowledgeable (about agency procedures). A
supervisee also must show initiative (seeking out learning opportunities
and applying new knowledge) and accepting of criticism (trying to
improve and accepting feedback when it is justified and constructive).
Supervisors also have responsibilities in educational supervision.
They must provide education and training (formal and informal
opportunities to ensure supervisees have the knowledge and skills
needed to do their jobs competently) and feedback (explanations on
what is going well and what needs improvement). Identifying the
learning needs of supervisees should be done at hire and regularly
thereafter. Changes in the field must always be considered. Lastly,
supervisors should be aware of supervisees’ learning styles and ensure
that education is delivered via methods that are most effective. There
are three main cognitive learning styles: visual (uses visual objects
such as graphs and charts to learn), auditory (retains information
through hearing and speaking), and kinesthetic (likes to use hands-on
approaches to acquire knowledge).
THE SUPERVISEE’S ROLE IN SUPERVISION (E.G.,
IDENTIFYING LEARNING NEEDS, SELF-ASSESSMENT,
PRIORITIZING, ETC.)
The short-term objectives of supervision are to increase a social
worker’s capacity to work more effectively, to provide a work context
conducive to productivity, and to help a social worker take satisfaction
507
in work. The ultimate objective is to assure the delivery of the most
effective and efficient client services.
Social workers who are administrators should take reasonable
steps to ensure that adequate agency or organizational resources are
available to provide appropriate staff supervision.
Competence is essential for ethical social work practice and social
workers must be competent in the services that they are providing
(NASW Code of Ethics—Competence). In order to be competent, they
must keep abreast of new developments in the field and obtain
supervision.
Social workers should provide services and represent themselves
as competent only within the boundaries of their education, training,
license, certification, consultation received, supervised experience, or
other relevant professional experience (NASW Code of Ethics—
Competence).
Social workers should provide services in substantive areas or use
intervention techniques or approaches that are new to them only after
engaging in appropriate study, training, consultation, and supervision
from people who are competent in those interventions or techniques
(NASW Code of Ethics—Competence).
When generally recognized standards do not exist with respect to
an emerging area of practice, social workers should exercise careful
judgment and take responsible steps (including appropriate education,
research, training, consultation, and supervision) to ensure the
competence of their work and to protect clients from harm (NASW
Code of Ethics—Competence).
If a supervisor needs to talk with a social worker about a problem
situation, the supervisor should meet privately with the social worker to
discuss the matter.
METHODS TO IDENTIFY LEARNING NEEDS AND
DEVELOP LEARNING OBJECTIVES FOR SUPERVISEES
361
Supervision is an essential way in which social workers acquire
knowledge and skills needed for professional practice. It is often the
bridge between the classroom and the field. Supervision is necessary
to improve client care, develop professionalism, and maintain ethical
508
standards in the field. Supervision has also become the cornerstone of
quality improvement and assurance.
Quality supervision is founded on a positive supervisor–supervisee
relationship that promotes client welfare and the professional
development of the supervisee. A supervisor is a teacher, coach,
consultant, mentor, evaluator, and administrator. Ultimately, effective
supervision ensures that clients are competently served. Supervision
ensures that social workers continue to increase their skills, which in
turn increases service effectiveness.
Some of the skills that social work supervisors must have in order to
effectively teach supervisees include the ability to:
■ Identify learning needs and styles.
■ Write learning goals and objectives.
■ Devise instructional strategies to accommodate needs and learnin
styles.
■ Present material in a didactic manner, using modeling.
■ Match learning styles to developmental levels (e.g., provide mo
instruction to junior supervisees and use guided discovery for thos
who are senior).
■ Explain the rationales for interventions.
■ Evaluate supervisees’ learning.
■ Give constructive feedback to supervisees.
Learning needs of supervisees may result from gaps in knowledge
about practice modalities; effective communication strategies; setting,
funding, or legal requirements; self-care strategies; and so on. Social
work supervisors should be knowledgeable about the skills supervisees
acquired from previous professional training and experience, as well as
gaps in learning, such as those related to diagnostic assessment and
treatment; ethical standards of practice; laws and rules; record keeping;
cultural awareness; methods for establishing treatment relationships
with clients; methods for including family members in clients’ treatment
when appropriate; communication with other professionals in
developing diagnosis and treatment plans and assuring continuity of
509
care; and so on. Lastly, social work supervisors should solicit input from
supervisees about what they view as their greatest learning needs and
develop learning objectives to meet these needs in partnership with
supervisees. Identifying learning needs and developing learning
objectives is a collaborative process between social work supervisors
and supervisees.
THE ELEMENTS OF CLIENT/CLIENT SYSTEM REPORTS
There is no one way to organize information or client files. Some client
information and files are obtained and stored in paper format. However,
increasingly client records are kept electronically with software to assist
professionals in organizing and accessing data.
Whether paper or electronic, client files are usually stored with the
362
following in separate sections or folders:
1. Demographic information and intake materials
2. Assessments, quarterly reviews, and reassessments
3. Service plan(s) with goals
4. Discharge plan
5. Releases of information and referrals
6. Correspondence
Social workers should keep psychotherapy notes in a secure
location outside of client files to provide added confidentiality
protection.
Often agency policies or requirements imposed by funders dictate
the organizational structure for client files. However, regardless of the
schema, it is essential that files are secure, up-to-date, and complete,
with a format that makes locating information easy and evident.
Social workers are expected to communicate effectively, including in
the preparation of written reports for external organizations. Poorly
written reports or the inclusion of irrelevant or inappropriate information
can have an adverse impact on a client. In the preparation of reports,
including those for the courts, social workers are expected to
510
communicate accurately and professionally. Reports generated by
social workers must be taken seriously and will not be treated
legitimately if there are spelling or grammatical mistakes, or the content
is not based on critical thought and analysis.
Social workers also must develop reports as requested or needed,
adhering to the standards of confidentiality, as failure to provide
professional observations may hinder opportunities for clients. Often,
social workers are reluctant to generate reports even when requested
by clients and legally allowed to do so.
Critical to developing reports is the knowledge that they must be
understandable and useful to recipients with a wide range of
educational backgrounds and literacy levels. In addition, social workers
must have a keen awareness of the purposes of reports, who they are
being written for, and how they should be presented differently
depending on the purposes and the audience.
Social workers should avoid irrelevant and inappropriate
information, meaningless phrases or slang words, and illogical
conclusions in the preparation and writing of reports. Social workers
should plan what should and should not be included in the final
documents prior to starting to develop them. It is also helpful to prepare
drafts for later editing. Having others review draft reports can help
catch errors and ensure the clarity of all material.
Social workers’ competence and the value of social work services
are often judged by the quality of written reports. Thus, it is essential
that thought and care be taken in their preparation, and that they
adhere to best practices and standards.
Administrative reports, such as annual reports from public and
private social service organizations, are critical to the fulfillment of the
social work mission. They provide accountability to the public about the
number of people served, the services delivered, and how funds were
allocated. They also may be used by social workers to document
unmet needs which should be addressed.
Social workers may be required to prepare grant reports,
363
evaluations, program proposals, and accreditation reports. While
each of these documents serves a different purpose, they all require
social workers to use their written communication skills and critical
thinking/analysis to help clients directly or indirectly.
511
For example, a program proposal sets forth a plan of activities
needed to begin or modify services in order to (better) meet clients’
needs. It includes recommendations to organize or arrange a program
in an effective and efficient manner. It describes and recommends
procedures and ways to organize services for maximum client benefit.
To ensure that it is implemented as intended, it must be clear, accurate,
and well-written.
THE ELEMENTS OF A CASE PRESENTATION
When a social worker communicates with others in order to ensure
comprehensive and complete care for clients, the social worker
completes a case presentation. Case presentations are also used in
professional development and learning to provide input into options for
treatment and to ensure services are being delivered effectively and
efficiently.
There is no universal format for a case presentation in social work
practice. However, there are some standard elements, including:
■ Identifying data (demographics, cultural considerations)
■ History of the presenting problem (family history)
■ Significant medical/psychiatric history (diagnoses)
■ Significant personal and/or social history (legal issue
academic/work problems, crisis/safety concerns)
■ Presenting problem (assessment, mental status, diagnosis)
■ Impressions and summary (interview findings)
■ Recommendations (treatment plan/intervention strategies, goa
theoretical models used)
Content areas can be added or eliminated based on the reasons for
the case presentation and input sought. Information for a case
presentation is usually information that a social worker has obtained
directly from a client during an interview and/or observation, as well as
that collected from collateral contacts, other professionals, and/or case
records.
512
THE PRINCIPLES AND PROCESSES FOR DEVELOPING
FORMAL DOCUMENTS (E.G., PROPOSALS, LETTERS,
BROCHURES, PAMPHLETS, REPORTS, EVALUATIONS)
Social workers are expected to communicate effectively and be able to
prepare formal documents. Being able to provide quality services is not
the only important aspect of social work; all work is undermined by poor
recording or documentation.
A good document begins with careful planning—jotting down the
report’s purpose and some notes about key content to be contained.
Many times, drafts need to be made to ensure that the formal
364
document meets its purpose and is written clearly, without
punctuation and other mistakes. Editing is usually required before
finalizing for dissemination. Typing reports is always preferred for a
more professional appearance and to avoid “illegible” handwriting.
From court reports, to grant proposals, to public relations
pamphlets, social workers are expected to communicate accurately
with others. Poor English skills can affect the quality of reports. Social
workers need to be able to write reports that can be taken “seriously”
by others.
Quality of content is just as critical as spelling and punctuation.
Time must be allotted to be able to do critical analyses, which many
formal reports require. It is easy to describe something, but much
harder to indicate its significance. Repeating facts may not provide
needed professional opinions and observations.
Formal documents will only count if they get to the right people.
Social workers must be aware of the purpose of documents to be
prepared, and to whom they are being written, and then write
accordingly. Social workers should avoid irrelevant, inappropriate
information; meaningless phrases; and illogical conclusions.
Social workers should expect that their documents may be
scrutinized. Thus, they should write just enough to make their points,
but not “overdocument” with irrelevant details. Social workers should be
specific and avoid characterizations, such as “poor outcome,” “good
result,” “moderate compliance,” “drunk,” “aggressive,” and “combative.”
They should also avoid acronyms and abbreviations and use precise
description and specific language (not “it seems,” “I suppose,” “it
appears,” “I believe,” “I feel,” and so on).
513
Social workers must prepare documents in a timely fashion and
consider ethical issues that can be related to their preparation and
distribution. Documents should not contain bias wording. Social
workers should not alter documents after they are written unless it is
appropriate to do so. Social workers must know when communication
is “privileged” and should not share information with those without a
need to know.
CONSULTATION APPROACHES (E.G., REFERRALS TO
SPECIALISTS)
Social workers are often called upon to seek consultation for a problem
related to a client, service, organization, and/or policy. Consultation is
the utilization of an “expert” in a specific area to assist with developing
a solution to the issue. Consultation is usually time limited and the
advice of the consultant can be used by a social worker in the problem-
solving process. Although a consultant does not have any formal
authority over a social worker, a consultant has informal authority as an
“expert.” However, a social worker is not required to follow the
recommendations of a consultant.
Four things are critical in consultation:
1. Defining the purpose of the consultation
2. Specifying the consultant’s role
3. Clarifying the nature of the problem
4. Outlining the consultation process
Social workers should seek the advice and counsel of colleagues
whenever such consultation is in the best interests of clients, but
should only do so from colleagues who have demonstrated
365
knowledge, expertise, and competence related to the subject of the
consultation (NASW Code of Ethics—Consultation).
When seeking consultation, social workers need to get the
permission of clients if any identifying or specific information will be
shared. In addition, social workers should only disclose information that
is absolutely necessary when interacting with consultants.
514
Social workers may also provide consultation in-person or remotely.
They should have the appropriate knowledge and skill to do so and
should follow all ethical standards, including avoiding conflicts of
interest and maintaining boundaries (NASW Code of Ethics—
Supervision and Consultation).
METHODS OF NETWORKING
The importance of networking has been stressed heavily in business,
but it has received far less attention in social work practice. This void is
interesting, because it is critical to the effective delivery of services.
Networking involves building relationships with other professionals who
share areas of interest. It is about creating a community around
common interests and building alliances. It is also about creating
opportunities to work with others toward the achievement of mutual
goals.
Although networking in business is a way to attract
patrons/customers or to get jobs, it has a broader, and more altruistic,
focus in social work.
For example, learning about others who do similar or
complementary work can result in a sharing of resources and expertise,
which could be beneficial to clients by keeping the cost of services
contained and/or increasing the skills of practitioners. Learning about
the skills of others and establishing professional relationships through
networking can also provide resources for clients who may need
referrals to other professionals.
Networking helps improve social skills and the ability to relate to
others in a variety of settings. It puts social workers “out there” so that
others can be aware of the important work that they do. Educating
others about social problems is an important part of making systematic
changes. Lastly, networking can identify individuals who would be good
candidates for jobs. Recruiting qualified individuals into the agencies
where social workers are employed results in clients receiving quality
care.
THE PROCESS OF INTERDISCIPLINARY AND
INTRADISCIPLINARY TEAM COLLABORATION
515
Social workers often work together with others from various
professions. This is known as an interdisciplinary approach. Some
interdisciplinary teams interface daily, whereas others may only meet
periodically. Sometimes social workers form interdisciplinary
relationships that do not constitute team practice but are nevertheless
necessary for effective service. These relationships may be with legal
or educational professionals. To practice effectively, social workers
must be prepared to work with professionals from all other disciplines
that may be needed by a client. In turn, social work knowledge is
influenced by, and in turn influences, other disciplines, including family
studies, medicine, psychiatry, sociology, education, and psychology.
Interdisciplinary teams are often seen as advantageous to clients
366
because they do not have the burden of navigating multiple service
systems and communicating to multiple professionals involved in their
care. Interdisciplinary teams can also be cost effective and can
increase positive outcomes.
An interdisciplinary approach may also have benefits for social
workers as they:
1. Provide peer support, especially when working with stressf
problems associated with involuntary service delivery, violenc
suicide, and so on.
2. Allow for work to be assigned across multiple professionals.
3. Fulfill professional goals by ensuring all aspects of a clien
biopsychosocial–spiritual–cultural care are delivered.
4. Create cross-fertilization of skills between professionals.
5. Facilitate decision making related to all aspects of client care, whic
can lead to increased job satisfaction.
6. Streamline work practices through sharing of information.
Interdisciplinary collaboration is a rewarding, yet challenging, social
work activity. Collaboration, a learned skill that can be improved
through practice, is a vehicle for improving services for all clients. It
means working with others for the betterment of a client. Collaborative
teams are more likely to develop important new and innovative
approaches to dealing with problems.
516
Collaboration goes beyond people sitting around a table. It includes
premeeting work (i.e., making telephone calls), how members typically
conduct themselves (i.e., being friendly), and how meetings proceed
(i.e., choosing to ignore minor irritations in order to get on with the
agenda).
Social workers must understand their own styles and focus on their
own behavior as part of a group, rather than on how other members
should change.
Collaboration involves strong interpersonal communication and
group process skills, as well as being able to understand the
perspectives of others. It can be discrete (distinct or separate; limited to
single occurrence or action) or continuous (ongoing or repetitive).
The following list provides some guidelines that can be helpful when
social workers participate in such collaboration.
1. Social workers should clearly articulate their roles o
interdisciplinary teams.
2. Social workers should understand the roles of professionals fro
other disciplines on these teams.
3. Social workers should seek and establish common ground w
these professionals, including commonalities in professional goals
4. Social workers should acknowledge the differences within the fie
and across other disciplines.
5. Social workers should address conflict within teams so that it doe
not interfere with the collaborative process and the team
outcomes.
6. Social workers should establish and maintain collegial relationship
There are also ethical guidelines that must be followed when social
workers are part of interdisciplinary collaboration (NASW Code of
Ethics—Interdisciplinary Collaboration).
367
1. Social workers who are members of an interdisciplinary team shou
participate in and contribute to decisions that affect the well-being
clients by drawing on the perspectives, values, and experiences
the social work profession. Professional and ethical obligations
517
the interdisciplinary team as a whole and of its individual membe
should be clearly established.
2. Social workers for whom a team decision raises ethical concer
should attempt to resolve the disagreement through appropria
channels. If the disagreement cannot be resolved, social worke
should pursue other avenues to address their concerns consiste
with client well-being.
Intradisciplinary teams are composed exclusively of social workers
who may have different levels of training and skill within the profession.
Intradisciplinary teams are often referred to as unidisciplinary. An
interdisciplinary approach differs from a multidisciplinary one due to its
holistic nature. Professionals in an interdisciplinary team are charged
with working together and a treatment plan is usually developed by the
entire group. In service provision, the work of each professional group
can and often does overlap. Interdependence throughout the problem-
solving process is stressed. Each member contributes to the group’s
goals. In multidisciplinary teams, the steps are often conducted in
isolation and outcomes are later shared with other team members.
Intradisciplinary teams in social work practice can be useful in
professional development, mentorship, and the provision of
supervision. However, working on a team with others in the profession
has advantages and disadvantages. Members share the same
professional orientation and values, which can facilitate consensus and
cohesion within the group, but the ability to generate alternative
solutions to problems when viewing problems from multiple
professional perspectives can be reduced.
THE BASIC TERMINOLOGY OF PROFESSIONS OTHER
THAN SOCIAL WORK (E.G., LEGAL, EDUCATIONAL)
Social workers should maintain access to professional consultation.
Often, this consultation may be from qualified professionals in other
disciplines. Each discipline has its own set of assumptions, values, and
priorities; in order to ensure that the assessment of a client’s problems
consider all possible root causes (including medical) and all needs of a
518
client are met, the social worker should consult with experts in other
fields, as well as refer a client to them when needed.
Social workers often work together with others from various
professions. This is known as an interdisciplinary approach. Some
interdisciplinary teams interface daily, whereas others may only meet
periodically.
Sometimes social workers form interdisciplinary relationships that
do not constitute team practice, but are nevertheless necessary for
effective service. These relationships may be with legal or educational
professionals. To practice effectively, social workers must be prepared
to work with professionals from all other disciplines that may be needed
by a client.
In turn, social work knowledge is influenced by, and in turn
368
influences, other disciplines, including family studies, medicine,
psychiatry, sociology, education, and psychology.
TECHNIQUES TO INFORM AND INFLUENCE
ORGANIZATIONAL AND SOCIAL POLICY
Social policy is influenced by many factors, such as the following.
Knowledge/Innovation
Knowledge and innovation create new opportunities to change, as well
as information that current practices may need to be reformed.
Technological advances are often drivers of changes in policy.
Social, Political, and Economic Conditions/Resources
Good policies are often not adopted because they are proposed
without the social, political, or economic resources to move them
through the policy process and/or implement them.
Social norms change over time and foster or impede social policy
development or revision.
Political and/or economic conditions can also promote or hinder the
creation and/or revision of policy, as well as whether policy alternatives
are suggested or considered for adoption.
Legal Issues/Laws
519
Understanding how new policies will influence or interact with existing
laws is essential. Policies may not be supported if they are believed to
negatively impact on existing policies that are seen as beneficial.
Institutional Influences
The structure of institutions, such as government agencies, private
sector organizations, and so on, can also impact the ability to influence
and efficiently or effectively implement social policies. Sometimes
policies are so complex or integrated into the practices of complex
institutional systems that it is difficult to understand them; therefore,
change is less likely.
External Influences
The media and other external influences can be very influential. Media
can be used to call attention to a problem. More media coverage of one
policy alternative may influence its support as it is more familiar. Public
opinion is a very salient influence as to whether policies will be
proposed and/or adopted.
Social workers who want to promote certain social policies must be
aware of these influences and use methods to support policies as they
relate to these areas. Contrarily, social workers can decrease the
369
desirability of policies by creating barriers or removing positive
influences in these areas.
Problems are also often associated with policy implementation.
Policies may not be clearly communicated, leaving implementers and
others at a loss as to how to follow them in order to achieve the
intended goals. Negative attitudes of service personnel, lack of
resources to carry out policies, and/or the conflict with previously
established procedures or structures can also be obstacles to
implementation.
Cooptation has many meanings, but may be used as a strategy
to influence social policy as leaders will try to quiet dissention or
disturbances not only by dealing with immediate grievances, but by
making efforts to channel the energies and angers of dissenters into
more legitimate and less disruptive activities. When coopting,
incentives are offered and other efforts are made aimed at
complacency.
520
METHODS TO ASSESS THE AVAILABILITY OF
COMMUNITY RESOURCES
Social workers must respect the rights to self-determination of clients.
In order for clients to make informed decisions, it is critical that they
understand the range of services available and be informed about any
opportunities they have to obtain services from other service providers.
Clients should also understand their right to be referred to other
professionals for assistance, as well as their right to refuse services
and possible consequences of such refusals.
Throughout the problem-solving process, social workers should be
assisting clients to access available resources, as well as create new
ones if they do not exist or are not appropriate. In order for clients to
choose between alternative resources, social workers must review the
advantages and disadvantages of using each.
There are important steps, as well as ethical concerns, that must be
taken when referring clients for services.
Step 1: Clarifying the Need or Purpose for the Referral
Social workers should refer clients to other professionals when the
other professionals’ specialized knowledge or expertise is needed to
serve clients fully or when social workers believe that they are not
being effective or making reasonable progress with clients and that
other services are required (NASW Code of Ethics—Referral for
Services).
Step 2: Researching Resources
When making a referral, it is critical that a social worker refers to a
competent provider, someone with expertise in the problem that a
client is experiencing. When researching resources, a client’s right to
self-determination should be paramount. In addition, if a client is
already receiving services from an agency, it may be advisable to
see if there are available services provided by this agency in order to
avoid additional coordination and fragmentation for a client.
Step 3: Discussing and Selecting Options
Social workers are prohibited from giving or receiving payment for a
referral when no professional service is provided by the referring
521
social worker (NASW Code of Ethics—Referral for Services).
Step 4: Planning for Initial Contact
370
Social workers may want to work with a client to prepare for the
initial meeting. Preparation may include helping a client to
understand what to expect or reviewing needs and progress made
so that it can be discussed with the new provider.
Step 5: Initial Contact
Social workers who refer clients to other professionals should take
appropriate steps to facilitate an orderly transfer of responsibility.
Social workers who refer clients to other professionals should
disclose, with clients’ consent, all pertinent information to the new
service providers (NASW Code of Ethics—Referral for Services).
Step 6: Follow-Up to See If Need Was Met
Social workers should always follow-up to ensure that there was not
a break in service and that the new provider is meeting a client’s
needs.
TECHNIQUES FOR MOBILIZING COMMUNITY
PARTICIPATION
Community participation is critical in social work practice. Community
participation informs others about needed changes that must occur.
Policies, programs, and services that were effective or appropriate
previously may have become ineffective or inappropriate.
Community participation also creates relationships and partnerships
among diverse groups who can then work together, but may not usually
do so.
Community participation puts decision-making power partly or
wholly with the community, ensuring that individuals will remain
interested and involved over time.
When engaging in community-based decision making, individuals will
typically go through various stages.
Orientation stage—Community members may meet for the first
time and start to get to know each other.
522
Conflict stage—Disputes, little fights, and arguments may occur.
These conflicts are eventually worked out.
Emergence stage—Community members begin to see and agree
on a course of action.
Reinforcement stage—Community members finally make a
decision and justify why it was correct.
Community members are far more likely to buy into policy that has
been created with their participation. Their support over time will lead to
permanent change.
Community participation energizes communities to continue to
change in positive directions. Once involved in a successful change
effort, community members see what they can accomplish collectively
and take on new challenges.
Lastly, community members must inform policy-makers and
planners of the real needs of the community, so that the most important
problems and issues can be addressed. They must also provide
information about what has been tried before and worked or not
worked.
METHODS TO ESTABLISH PROGRAM OBJECTIVES
371
AND OUTCOMES
The terms “mission,” “goals,” “objectives,” and “outcomes” are often
used interchangeably without being clearly defined.
A mission statement is a general, concise statement outlining the
purpose guiding the practices of an organization. Outcomes eventually
flow from the mission statements of an agency. Goals are broad,
general statements of what the program intends to accomplish. Goals
describe broad outcomes and concepts expressed in general terms
(e.g., clear communication, problem-solving skills). Goals should
provide a framework for determining the more specific objectives of a
program and should be consistent with the mission of the agency. A
single goal may have many specific subordinate objectives.
Objectives are brief, clear statements that describe the desired
outcomes. They are distinguished from goals by the level of specificity.
523
Goals express intended outcomes in general terms and objectives
express them in specific terms.
Outcomes may be knowledge, abilities (skills), and/or attitudes
(values, dispositions) that have been obtained. Outcomes are achieved
results.
GOVERNANCE STRUCTURES
Governance concerns those structures, functions, processes, and
customs that exist within an organization to ensure it operates in a way
that achieves its objectives, and does so in an effective and transparent
manner. It is a framework of accountability to clients, stakeholders, and
the wider community, within which organizations make decisions and
control their functions and resources to achieve their objectives.
Good governance adds value by improving the performance of an
organization through more efficient management, more strategic and
equitable resource allocation and service provision, and other
improvements that lend themselves to improved outcomes and
impacts.
Social workers should advocate within and outside their agencies
for adequate resources to meet clients’ needs and for resource
allocation procedures that are open and fair (NASW Code of Ethics—
Administration). When not all clients’ needs can be met, an allocation
procedure should be developed that is nondiscriminatory, appropriate,
and consistent. Social workers should take reasonable steps to ensure
that adequate agency or organizational resources are available to
provide appropriate staff supervision and that the working environment
for which they are responsible is consistent with and encourages
compliance with the NASW Code of Ethics.
THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN FORMAL AND INFORMAL
POWER STRUCTURES IN THE DECISION-MAKING
PROCESS
Formal power is received in accordance with position in an organization
and the authority associated with that position. Conversely, informal
524
power stems from the relationships built and respect earned from
coworkers.
Formal Power
372
Organizations typically have organizational charts that list the
relationship and ranks of positions. The charts detail the lines of
authority and responsibilities and outline the formal power structures of
the organizations. Formal power may refer to position in the
organizational hierarchy, corporate structure, or even job function. A
chief executive officer, for example, has decision-making power in
many areas. Even in small agencies without official organizational
charts, employees can easily recognize formal power because of job
roles, titles, and functions.
Informal Power
The most powerful person in an organizational unit is not necessarily a
supervisor. Instead, persons with the most influence, who can lead
others to achieve goals or accomplish tasks, may have the greatest
influence. Informal power refers to the ability to lead, direct, or achieve
without official authority. It is derived from relationships that are built.
Employees with informal power may be the most experienced or
knowledgeable or the most respected because of personality traits.
All forms of power within an organization are beneficial when used
appropriately. Formal power is necessary to achieve goals. Informal
power can be equally useful. Workers may be more apt to accept
criticism or take direction when they receive guidance from a colleague
that is respected and trusted. It is often easier to get employee “buy-in”
when suggestions come from those with informal power.
ACCREDITATION AND/OR LICENSING REQUIREMENTS
Administrative reviews, such as annual reviews from public and private
social service organizations, are critical to the fulfillment of the social
work mission. They provide accountability to the public about the
number of people served, the services delivered, and how funds were
allocated. They also may be used by social workers to document
unmet needs that should be addressed.
525
Social workers may be required to engage in grant monitoring,
evaluations, program inspections, and accreditation reviews. Although
each of these reviews serves a different purpose, they all require social
workers to use critical thinking/analysis to help clients directly or
indirectly.
Content Area III: Practice Questions
373
The following section has 46 unique practice questions that assess
retention of material related to psychotherapy, clinical
interventions, and case management. The number of questions
reflects the approximate proportion of a typical exam (27%)
devoted to this content.
1. During the first session, a client becomes very upset and
hostile about his need to seek treatment. He blames others for
his situation and yells in a loud manner. In order to facilitate the
problem-solving process, the social worker should FIRST:
A. Listen to the client as he explains his concerns
B. Tell the client that he needs to calm down so the social
worker can understand his issues
C. Assess why the client is so upset and unwilling to accept
responsibility for his problems
2. A client in a group facilitated by a social worker has a red face
and appears visibly upset when he talks about his current
relationship with his family. When the social worker comments
how the client appears unhappy about his current situation, the
client says, “Everything is fine.” How can the behavior of the
client BEST be explained?
A. Lack of congruent communication
B. Denial of an underlying psychic conflict
C. Resistance to address the situation
3.
526
How is positive regard BEST defined?
A. Exploring with clients the protective factors that are present
in their lives
B. Working with clients to establish goals that will improve
their quality of life
C. Accepting clients regardless of their actions or statements
4
375
.
A client comes to see a social worker because she is having
multiple issues with her job. During the initial session, she tells
the social worker that she “can’t wait for advice on how to fix
the problems.” In this situation, the social worker should:
A. Help the client to prioritize the issues so that the most
urgent are addressed first
B. Ask the client why she feels that the social worker’s advice
would be so valuable
C. Clarify the responsibilities of the client and social worker
with regard to the change process
5. The social worker ends a family session with, “During the last
hour, each of you has had a chance to discuss your frustrations
with one another and how sometimes your own actions have
been perceived by each other as hurtful, though they were not
intended to be so.” The social worker’s statement MOST likely
aims to:
A. Clarify to the family that the social worker is objective since
each member got a chance to speak
B. Summarize what occurred so family members can gain a
new understanding of their actions
C. Praise the family members for their openness and
participation in the session
6. Which of the following must a social worker consider when
obtaining formal feedback from others about social work
527
practice delivery?
A. Client consent is needed if consultation is related to client
care
B. The best insight can often be gained from those who are
critical of care
C. Feedback is important at key decision points in service
development and implementation
7. When a social worker and client are not from the same ethnic
or racial group, a social worker should:
A. Recognize the differences and understand how they may
impact on the treatment process
B. Engage in supervision and/or consultation with a member
of that ethnic or racial group
C. Understand the customs and beliefs that are universal to
those from that ethnic or racial group
8
377
.
During the first session, a young woman sobs as she states
that she does not think that she will ever get through the recent
dissolution of her marriage. She ends by saying that she “is
alone and nobody understands how I feel.” In order to BEST
instill hope, the social worker should:
A. Talk about how the social work had the same feelings
during a marital breakup
B. Assure her that many women in similar situations are able
to work through this isolation
C. Refer her to a support group with other women who are
going through divorce
9. Which of the following is a primary prevention strategy?
A. Regular screenings of those with risk factors for an illness
or disease
528
B. Regular exercise and good nutrition
C. Taking low doses of aspirin for those with heart conditions
10. Which of the following is the FIRST goal of assisting clients
who have suffered life crises?
A. Linking clients with others who have experienced similar
crises to build a network of support
B. Identifying the cause of the crises in order to prevent the
crises from reoccurring in the future
C. Assisting clients to establish a sense of equilibrium and
return to prior levels of functioning
11. Which of the following contains thoughts, feelings, desires,
and memories of which a client has no awareness even
though they influence the client’s daily life?
A. Preconscious
B. Superego
C. Unconscious
12. After a client assessment is completed, what is expected to
follow according to the problem-solving process?
A. Intervention
B. Planning
C. Engagement
379
13.
Which of the following is a level of awareness as defined
by Freud?
A. Id
B. Preconscious
C. Preconventional
14. Which BEST describes the role of a social worker when
engaged in crisis intervention?
529
A. Short-term support focused on restoring clients’
psychological capacities
B. Long-term support to ensure clients are able to address
trauma experienced
C. Highly involved support focused on meeting the clients’
basic needs
15. Which of the following is a key concept in individual
psychology?
A. Striving for perfection
B. Aggressive urges
C. Repressed sexual fantasies
16. A social worker is seeing a 69-year-old client who is a former
cigarette smoker and has chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease (COPD), interfering with normal breathing. The client
takes several medications, including one to regulate her blood
pressure. Which of the following is a primary prevention need
of the client?
A. Receiving an annual influenza immunization
B. Monitoring her blood pressure to modify her medications
as needed
C. Reducing strenuous activity that causes heavy breathing
381
17.
Which is the MOST important reason that self-monitoring
is used as a social work technique?
A. Clients are the most reliable sources of information
B. Clients better understand the causes and frequency of the
problem behaviors
C. Clients collecting data is based on the principles of self-
determination
18. A social worker receives a referral to provide case
management to a family who just immigrated from another
530
country and needs to be linked to services to meet their basic
needs. The 13-year-old daughter in the family speaks English
in addition to her native language, which is exclusively spoken
by the parents. The social worker, who only understands and
speaks English, accepts the referral. Which BEST describes
this action by the social worker?
A. Ethical because the daughter will be available to translate
for the parents
B. Ethical because the services are time-limited and
nonclinical in nature
C. Unethical because the social worker cannot speak to or
understand all family members
19. A client reports to a social worker that he is having problems
with his wife because he feels that she does not care about
him. The social worker discovers that this belief by the
husband stems from his belief that she is always distracted
when he speaks. The social worker challenges and helps him
replace this thought with an alternative one that she “does
care, but just has a lot of other demands for her attention.”
Which approach is the social worker using to address the
husband’s issues?
A. Operant conditioning
B. Cognitive behavioral therapy
C. Ego psychology
20. A social worker observes that a client is having trouble
communicating with her husband, so she often confides in her
sister-in-law about her fears and concerns, hoping that the
sister-in-law will be able to assist. The sister-in-law finds that
she is becoming increasingly “in the middle” of the problems
that exist between her brother and his wife. Which term
BEST describes this family situation?
A. Triangulation
B. Differentiation
531
C. Familial regression
2
383
1
.
A married couple comes in to see a social worker because they
are having problems in their relationship. They report feeling
disconnected and having little intimacy. The husband admits
that his drinking recently caused him to be fired from his job
and he is currently unemployed. The wife reports that she is
fearful of her husband because he often is loud when he
drinks. She spends a lot of time out of the house. They have
not had sex for several months and are behind in their
mortgage payments. In order to assist the couple, the social
worker should FIRST:
A. Help the couple with their lack of emotional intimacy
B. Determine the reasons for the wife’s absence from the
home
C. Identify the extent of the husband’s alcohol use
22. In which of the following phases of child development is
rapprochement a subphase?
A. Normal symbiotic
B. Object constancy
C. Separation–individuation
23. When engaging in structural family therapy, social workers
may use which of the following techniques to understand and
diagnose structures that maintain families’ dysfunctional
interactions?
A. Confrontation
B. Journaling
C. Enactments
24. When working with an involuntary client, which of the
532
following actions is likely to be MOST effective during
engagement?
A. Reviewing the court order so the client understands why
services are mandated
B. Discussing mandates of confidentiality as per the ethical
code
C. Listening to understand the client’s current feelings and
situation
385
25.
During what ages does “latency” usually occur within the
psychosexual stages of development?
A. First year of life
B. Between 3 and 5 years old
C. From age 5 until puberty
26. Upon intake, a single mother admits to binge drinking on the
weekends. She states that she is not going to stop this
behavior. Using a harm reduction approach, a social worker
should:
A. Help the mother to prearrange for alternative childcare on
the weekends when she is drinking
B. Recommend that the mother go to a physician to assess if
she has any medical problems
C. Refer the mother for a drug and alcohol evaluation to
determine the extent of her drinking
27. Which action by a social worker will be MOST effective in
addressing resistance during engagement?
A. Clarifying the social worker’s role and the problem-solving
approach
B. Completing a biopsychosocial assessment to better
understand the situation
C. Partializing the problem to identify action steps
533
28. A man is court ordered to receive an evaluation by a social
worker. Although initially agreeable to participating, the client
states at the conclusion of his meetings with the social worker
that he “changed his mind” and wished that he had never
agreed to be interviewed. He asks the social worker not to
release any information to the court. The social worker
should:
A. Respect the client’s wishes and not provide any
information to the court
B. Inform the court that the client rescinded his consent
C. Complete the evaluation based on all of the information
gathered
29. Which of the following is a critical part of termination in social
work practice?
A. Identifying other concerns that may need to be addressed
in the future
B. Reviewing the nature of the support systems that are
available to help
C. Anticipating how to address subsequent reoccurrences of
the problem
What is the primary goal of permanency planning?
387
30.
A. Living in stable and long-term homes
B. Improving educational outcomes
C. Ensuring treatment decisions are individually based
31. A man comes to see a social worker because he is sexually
attracted to those of the same gender and is deeply
distressed by the thought that he may be homosexual. Which
of the following BEST describes the feelings experienced by
this client?
A. Ego alien
534
B. Ego-syntonic
C. Fixations
32. When determining whether a task-centered approach is
appropriate for a client, which of the following must the social
worker consider?
A. The client takes a very active role in making change
B. The treatment is highly structured and time limited
C. Termination usually begins in the first session
33. Which of the following statements is accurate regarding
confidentiality in group work?
A. Group members have the same protection of confidentiality
received in individual counseling
B. Group members have a legal duty not to disclose
information that is shared
C. Social workers cannot guarantee that information disclosed
in groups will be kept confidential
3
389
4
.
A client tells a social worker that she “feels like a failure”
because she cannot seem to meet the multiple daily demands
of working and parenting. The social worker states that “many
people in your situation experience the same feelings.” Which
of the following techniques is being used by the social worker?
A. Validating
B. Reflecting
C. Clarifying
35. When conducting a social work interview, what must a social
worker consider about these interactions?
A. These interviews can be informational, diagnostic, or
535
therapeutic
B. These interviews are uniform in nature to collect consistent
information on all clients
C. These interviews collect important information to be used
in the problem-solving process
36. What is the BEST definition of empowerment?
A. Helping clients obtain services needed to solve their
problems
B. Providing clients with training and education to improve
their coping skills
C. Assisting clients to realize that they have strengths and
resources to solve their own problems
37. According to self-psychology, which is an essential child need
that caregivers must meet to ensure healthy development?
A. Cultural
B. Biological
C. Twinship
391
38.
According to object relations theory, at about which age
does the normal symbiotic phase of development end?
A. 5 months
B. 2 years
C. 2 weeks
39. A client starts to miss appointments with a social worker after
achieving goals. Prior to these absences, the client had very
good attendance and had made substantial progress. What is
the MOST likely reason for these missed appointments?
A. Readiness to terminate from services
B. Emergence of a new problem that needs to be addressed
C. Dissatisfaction with achieved outcomes
536
40. A client has just been diagnosed with stage 4 cancer and is
referred to a pain management group to minimize the
discomfort associated with her illness. Which of the following
types of prevention is being recommended for the client?
A. Tertiary prevention
B. Primary prevention
C. Secondary prevention
41. When making level of care determinations, which criterion is
primarily used in behavioral health settings?
A. Capitation
B. Medical necessity
C. Managed risk
4
393
2
.
A couple comes to see a social worker because they feel that
they have suffered discrimination. They are blind and would
like to adopt a child but have been told by an adoption agency
that it is not possible because of their visual impairments. They
are distraught and do not think that they will be able to fight the
agency bias. In order to BEST assist this couple, the social
worker should:
A. Assist them to identify other methods to become parents
B. Help them cope with their disappointment from being
denied
C. Support them in fighting the agency bias
43. A social worker in a mental health agency is very upset by the
passage of legislation that, in his opinion, will be detrimental
to some clients. He is asked by an advocacy organization to
join a protest; he does so on his own time and without
identifying his employer. His agency director is very upset by
his participation because the board of directors of the mental
537
health agency supported this legislation. Which of the
following BEST describes the social worker’s actions?
A. Unethical because the social worker is considered a
representative of his employer
B. Ethical because he acted as a private individual
C. Unethical because he should have gotten permission from
his agency director first
44. Which of the following BEST describes the benefit of peer
supervision in social work practice?
A. Peer supervision is less expensive than individual
supervision
B. Peer supervision can occur as needed, anytime and
anywhere
C. Peer supervision is a reciprocal learning relationship aimed
at skill acquisition
45. An agency is concerned with the recidivism of its clients and
hires a consultant to provide recommendations about service
modifications that have to occur. The consultant has a
doctorate and extensive experience in the field. After several
weeks, the consultant generates a report advising of service
changes that, in the social worker’s professional opinion,
would be detrimental to clients. In this situation, the social
worker should:
A. Agree to the service changes as the consultant is an
“expert” in the field
B. Refuse to implement the service changes, citing the
reasons for the concerns
C. Identify the feelings of others in the agency about the
proposed service changes
4
395
6
.
538
A social worker is struggling with treating a client diagnosed
with pica. This disorder is not common among those served by
her agency. The social worker believes that it is in the best
interest of the client for the social worker to obtain consultation.
A colleague in the agency has shown interest in the situation
and agrees to advise because she has known the social
worker for many years and they both became employed at the
agency immediately after graduation. In this situation, the
social worker should:
A. Decline the offer in order to find a consultant with more
experience in treating this disorder
B. Accept the offer because the colleague is immediately
available to assist
C. Decline the offer as it is a conflict of interest to use a
colleague employed by the same agency
539
1
374
.
A. The client’s actions are occurring during the first session.
There is no indication that his outbursts are dangerous to himself
or the social worker. Upon intake, clients are often upset and
angry (even at themselves) for their current situations. The
problem-solving process starts with engagement.
As the question is asking what the social worker should do
FIRST, the answer should be directly related to engagement.
Listening to the client as a way of building rapport will help facilitate
change. The other answers will interfere with development of the
therapeutic alliance and/or may come later in the process.
Question Assesses
Content Area III—Psychotherapy, Clinical Interventions, and Case
Management; Therapeutic Relationship (Competency); The
Principles and Techniques for Building and Maintaining a Helping
Relationship (KSA)
2. A. Congruence is the matching of awareness and experience with
communication. It is essential that a client is able to express feelings
and that verbal communication is consistent with nonverba
expressions of feelings. Congruence is essential for the vitality of a
relationship and to facilitate true helping as part of the problem-
solving process. The client states that the relationship is “fine,” but
his physical symptoms clearly indicate that it is not. This is an
example of a lack of congruence in his communication. There is no
way to know if the client is resistant or is in denial but clearly the
client is not communicating his feelings based upon his facia
expressions.
Question Assesses
Content Area III—Psychotherapy, Clinical Interventions, and Case
Management; Therapeutic Relationship (Competency); The
Concept of Congruence in Communication (KSA)
3. C. Positive regard was a term used by Carl Rogers for the critica
540
need to view clients as worthy, accepting and supporting them
without judgment. It is believed to be essential for therapeutic
treatment according to the humanistic approach. Social workers
should set aside their own opinions and biases in order to show
acceptance of clients and believe that they are capable of change
while still having value and worth without changing.
Question Assesses
Content Area III—Psychotherapy, Clinical Interventions, and Case
Management; Therapeutic Relationship (Competency); Verbal and
Nonverbal Communication Techniques (KSA)
4
376
.
C. Social work roles in the problem-solving process include
consultant, advocate, case manager, catalyst, broker, mediator,
facilitator, instructor, mobilizer, resource allocator, and so forth.
Problems can arise when a client is not clear about a social
worker’s role. Initial clarification should be made during
engagement and should be discussed during the therapeutic
process if the role of a social worker changes. The social worker
must address the client’s misconception that the social worker will
be fixing the problem. The other response choices may be helpful
but do not relate to the comment by the client.
Question Assesses
Content Area III—Psychotherapy, Clinical Interventions, and Case
Management; Therapeutic Relationship (Competency); The Social
Worker’s Role in the Problem-Solving Process (KSA)
5. B. Summarization seeks to bring together the important points of a
discussion and to heighten awareness of progress made. It omits
irrelevant information and organizes pertinent aspects of the
interaction. It provides a sense of closure at the completion of a
discussion. During summarization, social workers and clients strive
to grasp the significance of what has been said, to formulate the
meaning of the information, and to achieve new understandings.
541
The social worker uses summarization at the end of a session to
pull together the meaning of what has been said by each family
member. This technique allows the family to better understand the
common theme in session discussions and perhaps gain a new
understanding about the behaviors of others.
Question Assesses
Content Area III—Psychotherapy, Clinical Interventions, and Case
Management; Therapeutic Relationship (Competency); Verbal and
Nonverbal Communication Techniques (KSA)
6. A. When social workers involve consultants or others in the
feedback process related to client care, clients should provide
consent. While sometimes the best learning can come from those
who are critical, feedback should be obtained from those with
specific expertise—not just because they have concerns. Feedback
is especially important at key decision points, but this response
choice does not directly focus on client well-being which is
paramount.
Question Assesses
Content Area III—Psychotherapy, Clinical Interventions, and Case
Management; Therapeutic Relationship (Competency); Methods
to Obtain and Provide Feedback (KSA)
7. A. Social workers’ self-awareness about their own attitudes, values,
and beliefs concerning cultural differences and a willingness to
acknowledge racial/cultural differences are critical factors in working
with diverse populations. Supervision and consultation are
important, but clients are the experts of their own experiences.
There are more intragroup differences than intergroup ones, so no
customs or beliefs are universal.
Question Assesses
Content Area III—Psychotherapy, Clinical Interventions, and Case
Management; Therapeutic Relationship (Competency); The
542
Dynamics of Diversity in the Social Worker–Client/Client System
Relationship (KSA)
8
378
.
B. Most practice situations are best handled with no self-
disclosure by social workers. Social workers should not discuss
their own marital breakups. Instead, social workers can normalize
feelings generally and let clients know that they will have the
opportunity to address their feelings. The woman may benefit from
meeting others who are going through similar experiences but
referring her at this point in the problem-solving process is not an
appropriate method for instilling hope.
Question Assesses
Content Area III—Psychotherapy, Clinical Interventions, and Case
Management; Therapeutic Relationship (Competency); The
Principles and Techniques for Building and Maintaining a Helping
Relationship (KSA)
9. B. Regular exercise and good nutrition are actions that are
classified as primary prevention, helping to avoid developing
diseases, injuries, and/or illnesses. The other response choices are
secondary prevention strategies that occur after diseases, injuries
and/or illnesses have developed to mitigate or slow their
progression/impacts.
Question Assesses
Content Area III—Psychotherapy, Clinical Interventions, and Case
Management; The Intervention Process (Competency); Primary,
Secondary, and Tertiary Prevention Strategies (KSA)
10. C. The immediate goal is to relieve the stress experienced, return
clients to previous levels of functioning, and assist them with
regaining equilibrium. A social worker may want to work with
clients to identify precursors and/or link with others for mutua
543
support, but these actions would occur after the crisis has
subsided.
Question Assesses
Content Area III—Psychotherapy, Clinical Interventions, and Case
Management; The Intervention Process (Competency); Crisis
Intervention and Treatment Approaches (KSA)
11. C. The unconscious contains thoughts, feelings, desires, and
memories of which clients have no awareness, but that influence
every aspect of their day-to-day lives. The preconscious contains
all the information outside of a client’s attention, but that is readily
available, if needed. The superego is the moral component of
personality. It causes clients to feel guilty when they go against
society’s rules.
Question Assesses
Content Area III—Psychotherapy, Clinical Interventions, and Case
Management; The Intervention Process (Competency);
Psychoanalytic and Psychodynamic Approaches (KSA)
12. B. The problem-solving process consists of engaging, assessing
planning, intervening, evaluating, and terminating. Thus, planning
is done after an assessment is complete.
Question Assesses
Content Area III—Psychotherapy, Clinical Interventions, and Case
Management; The Intervention Process (Competency); Problem-
Solving Models and Approaches (e.g., Brief, Solution-Focused
Methods or Techniques) (KSA)
1
380
3
.
B. Freud believed that behavior and personality derives from the
constant and unique interaction of conflicting psychological forces
544
that operate at three different levels of awareness: the
preconscious, the conscious, and the unconscious.
The preconscious contains all the information outside of a client’s
attention, but that is readily available, if needed. Preconscious
thoughts and feelings can be brought into the consciousness easily
if needed.
Question Assesses
Content Area III—Psychotherapy, Clinical Interventions, and Case
Management; The Intervention Process (Competency);
Psychoanalytic and Psychodynamic Approaches (KSA)
14. C. Crisis intervention focuses on the here and now, is time limited
(most crises last from 4–6 weeks), is directive, and requires high
levels of activity and involvement from social workers. Socia
workers’ primary goal is to return clients to equilibrium and meet
their immediate needs. Although the first response choice
indicates that the support is short term, it is incorrect because
social workers focus on meeting basic needs, not “restoring
clients’ psychological capacities.”
Question Assesses
Content Area III—Psychotherapy, Clinical Interventions, and Case
Management; The Intervention Process (Competency); Crisis
Intervention and Treatment Approaches (KSA)
15. A. Individual psychology is a theory of human behavior
emphasizing the drive to overcome feelings of inferiority by
compensation and the need to achieve personal goals that have
value for society. Alfred Adler believed that the main motives of
human thought and behavior were a striving for superiority and
power, partly in compensation for feelings of inferiority. Adler
believed that the main motivations for human behavior were not
sexual or aggressive urges but striving for perfection.
Question Assesses
545
Content Area III—Psychotherapy, Clinical Interventions, and Case
Management; The Intervention Process (Competency);
Psychoanalytic and Psychodynamic Approaches (KSA)
16. A. The receipt of an influenza immunization is the only response
choice aimed at disease prevention. Reducing strenuous activity is
associated with managing or living with chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD). Such actions are tertiary prevention
Monitoring medication is an activity aimed to slow the progression
or long-term impacts of conditions, including high blood pressure
Thus, medication monitoring is a secondary prevention activity.
Question Assesses
Content Area III—Psychotherapy, Clinical Interventions, and Case
Management; The Intervention Process (Competency); Primary,
Secondary, and Tertiary Prevention Strategies (KSA)
1
382
7
.
B. Self-monitoring consists of clients systematically observing
their own behavior. Most clients are not entirely aware of the
extent to which they engage in various behaviors and/or
antecedents or consequences of their actions. When clients are
provided with the opportunity to observe their own behaviors
carefully, dramatic changes often occur by the mere monitoring of
the behaviors themselves. The incorrect response choices are
important but are not directly linked to use of client self-
monitoring.
Question Assesses
Content Area III—Psychotherapy, Clinical Interventions, and Case
Management; The Intervention Process (Competency);
Client/Client System Self-Monitoring Techniques (KSA)
18. C. Because the parents do not speak or understand English, the
social worker should arrange for a qualified interpreter or
546
translator. The use of the daughter to translate for her parents is
not appropriate because the parents may be apprehensive to
identify the family’s true needs to their daughter. In addition, the
social worker will only learn what the parents say through the
daughter. Valuable information may be omitted or lost. Lastly, the
daughter also may not communicate what the social worker is
saying in a manner that is appropriate or accurate.
Question Assesses
Content Area III—Psychotherapy, Clinical Interventions, and Case
Management; The Intervention Process (Competency); The
Principles and Techniques of Interviewing (e.g., Supporting,
Clarifying, Focusing, Confronting, Validating, Feedback,
Reflecting, Language Differences, Use of Interpreters, and
Redirecting) (KSA)
19. B. Cognitive behavioral therapy aims to change patterns of
thinking or behavior that are responsible for clients’ difficulties. In
this approach, the social worker assists clients to change attitudes
and behaviors by focusing on thoughts, images, beliefs, and
attitudes that are held (cognitive processes) and replacing
distorted thinking patterns with healthy ones (cognitive
restructuring).
Question Assesses
Content Area III—Psychotherapy, Clinical Interventions, and Case
Management; The Intervention Process (Competency); Cognitive
and Behavioral Interventions (KSA)
20. A. Triangulation occurs when there is anxiety and tension between
two individuals that may cause them not to communicate directly.
In this situation, they communicate through a third person, leading
to the formation of a triangle. Often the two people try to get the
third to take each of their sides when disagreements arise.
Question Assesses
547
Content Area III—Psychotherapy, Clinical Interventions, and Case
Management; The Intervention Process (Competency); Family
Therapy Models, Interventions, and Approaches (KSA)
2
384
1
.
C. Many of the problems reported by the couple appear to be
caused by the alcohol use of the husband, including his
unemployment and their financial problems. The social worker
should FIRST determine the extent of the husband’s drinking and
his willingness to address this issue because many of the reported
problems will not change if this behavior continues. Treating
substance misuse and medical issues always is prioritized
because they are often the etiological causes of negative impacts
on psychosocial well-being.
Question Assesses
Content Area III—Psychotherapy, Clinical Interventions, and Case
Management; The Intervention Process (Competency); Couples
Interventions and Treatment Approaches (KSA)
22. C. Rapprochement occurs between 15 and 24 months. In this
subphase of separation–individuation, the child once again
becomes close to the mother. The child realizes that physica
mobility demonstrates psychic separateness from the mother and
may want her in sight.
Question Assesses
Content Area III—Psychotherapy, Clinical Interventions, and Case
Management; The Intervention Process (Competency);
Psychoanalytic and Psychodynamic Approaches (KSA)
23. C. Structural family therapy is based on the premise that there is
an overall structure or organization that maintains family
dysfunction. Restructuring is based on observing and manipulating
interactions within therapeutic sessions. Enactments are
548
suggested by social workers as ways to diagnose structure and
provide openings for restructuring interventions.
Question Assesses
Content Area III—Psychotherapy, Clinical Interventions, and Case
Management; The Intervention Process (Competency); Family
Therapy Models, Interventions, and Approaches (KSA)
24. C. Engagement is aimed at starting to build the therapeutic
alliance. When a client is involuntary, the client may be reluctant to
trust the social worker and may think that the social worker does
not understand the client’s feelings or current situation. Thus
listening is the most effective action because it begins to build
rapport. It shows the client that the social worker cares about what
is being said and is nonjudgmental.
Question Assesses
Content Area III—Psychotherapy, Clinical Interventions, and Case
Management; The Intervention Process (Competency); Methods
to Engage and Work With Involuntary Clients/Client Systems
(KSA)
2
386
5
.
C. The oral stage occurs during the first year of life, followed by
the anal stage, which occurs during toilet training (2–3 years old).
The phallic stage is from ages 3 to 4 and is followed by latency,
which begins at about age 5 and lasts until puberty. The genital
stage begins in puberty with the source of pleasure being the
genitals.
Question Assesses
Content Area III—Psychotherapy, Clinical Interventions, and Case
Management; The Intervention Process (Competency);
Psychoanalytic and Psychodynamic Approaches (KSA)
549
26. A. Although more than one of the response choices may be
appropriate actions to be taken by a social worker, assisting the
mother to find alternative childcare is the answer that directly
relates to “a harm reduction approach” as directed in the question.
Question Assesses
Content Area III—Psychotherapy, Clinical Interventions, and Case
Management; The Intervention Process (Competency); Technique
for Harm Reduction for Self and Others (KSA)
27. A. Partialization is a good technique to assist clients in breaking
down problems or goals into less overwhelming and more
manageable components. However, it does not happen during
engagement, but rather planning and/or intervention. Completing a
biopsychosocial assessment also does not happen during
engagement. Helping the client to understand the social worker’s
role and the nature of helping does occur during engagement and
is useful for helping alleviate the fears of resistant clients.
Question Assesses
Content Area III—Psychotherapy, Clinical Interventions, and Case
Management; The Intervention Process (Competency);
Partializing Techniques (KSA)
28. C. The evaluation is court ordered and, therefore, the social
worker does not need to get the consent of the client to perform
services and/or release information to the court. However, it is
essential that the social worker inform the client at the onset about
what he has control over and what information will/will not be
released. The client not wanting the social worker to release the
information does not change the legal duty to do so.
Question Assesses
Content Area III—Psychotherapy, Clinical Interventions, and Case
Management; The Intervention Process (Competency); Methods
550
to Engage and Work With Involuntary Clients/Client Systems
(KSA)
29. C. Termination is focused on reviewing accomplishments,
anticipating how to address the problem if it arises in the future,
and recognition of the loss on the part of the client and socia
worker because the relationship is ending. Identifying new
problems or available support systems is not appropriate during
termination.
Question Assesses
Content Area III—Psychotherapy, Clinical Interventions, and Case
Management; The Intervention Process (Competency); The
Indicators of Client/Client System Readiness for Termination
(KSA)
3
388
0
.
A. Permanency planning is an approach to child welfare that is
based on the belief that children need permanence to thrive. Child
protection services should focus on getting children into and
maintaining permanent homes.
Question Assesses
Content Area III—Psychotherapy, Clinical Interventions, and Case
Management; The Intervention Process (Competency);
Permanency Planning (KSA)
31. A. When the ego is comfortable with feelings and/or behaviors, a
client is said to be ego-syntonic. However, if a client is bothered by
feelings and/or behaviors, the client would be ego-dystonic (ego
alien).
Question Assesses
551
Content Area III—Psychotherapy, Clinical Interventions, and Case
Management; The Intervention Process (Competency);
Psychoanalytic and Psychodynamic Approaches (KSA)
32. A. A task-centered approach aims to quickly engage clients in the
problem-solving process and to maximize their responsibility for
treatment outcomes. The focus is on the “here and now.” The
problem is partialized into clearly delineated tasks to be addressed
consecutively (assessment leads to goals, which lead to tasks).
Termination, in this modality, begins almost immediately upon the
onset of treatment. All the response choices are hallmarks of task-
centered treatment but only determining if the client is capable of
taking such an active role needs to be considered before the onset
of treatment. The remaining choices impact service delivery once
the modality is selected.
Question Assesses
Content Area III—Psychotherapy, Clinical Interventions, and Case
Management; The Intervention Process (Competency); Task-
Centered Approaches (KSA)
33. C. When social workers engage in group work, they should seek
agreement among group members concerning preserving the
confidentiality of information shared. However, social workers
should inform members that they cannot guarantee that all group
members will honor such agreements. Group members do not
have the same legal obligations that social workers do to keep
information private and protected. However, social workers
engaged in group work should use the same professiona
standards regarding their own conduct.
Question Assesses
Content Area III—Psychotherapy, Clinical Interventions, and Case
Management; The Intervention Process (Competency); Group
Work Techniques and Approaches (e.g., Developing and
Managing Group Processes and Cohesion) (KSA)
552
3
390
4
.
A. Validation shows empathetic understanding of the client’s
problems. Validation lets the client know that she is not alone, and
others are experiencing the same feelings or difficulties. By
realizing that her belief is one that is shared by those in similar
situations, the client feels less isolated and gains strength by the
realization that others have worked through the problem(s) that
she is experiencing.
Question Assesses
Content Area III—Psychotherapy, Clinical Interventions, and Case
Management; The Intervention Process (Competency); The
Principles and Techniques of Interviewing (e.g., Supporting,
Clarifying, Focusing, Confronting, Validating, Feedback,
Reflecting, Language Differences, Use of Interpreters, and
Redirecting) (KSA)
35. C. Social work interviews are always purposeful and involve verba
and nonverbal communication between social workers and clients
during which ideas, attitudes, and feelings are exchanged. The
aim is to gather important information used in the problem-solving
process. Social work interviews are designed to serve the interest
of clients. Questions in a social work interview should be tailored
to the specifics of a client, not generic, “one size fits all” inquiries
The purpose of the social work interview can be informational,
diagnostic, or therapeutic, but the intent should be decided prior to
conducting the interview. The question asks about what a socia
worker should consider when doing the interview.
Question Assesses
Content Area III—Psychotherapy, Clinical Interventions, and Case
Management; The Intervention Process (Competency); The
Principles and Techniques of Interviewing (e.g., Supporting,
Clarifying, Focusing, Confronting, Validating, Feedback,
553
Reflecting, Language Differences, Use of Interpreters, and
Redirecting) (KSA)
36. C. Empowerment is a multidimensional social work process that
helps clients gain control over their lives. Empowerment fosters
clients to use their strengths and skills to make changes that they
desire. The correct answer focuses on clients solving their own
problems, a fundamental concept in empowerment.
Question Assesses
Content Area III—Psychotherapy, Clinical Interventions, and Case
Management; The Intervention Process (Competency); Strengths-
Based and Empowerment Strategies and Interventions (KSA)
37. C. According to Kohut, caregivers are not always responsive,
which leads to poor self-cohesion. It is essential that children
receive mirroring that confirms children’s sense of greatness and
perfection, idealizing of others through which children take in
strength and calmness, and twinship or alter-ego that provides
children with a sense of being human and a likeness to others.
Question Assesses
Content Area III—Psychotherapy, Clinical Interventions, and Case
Management; The Intervention Process (Competency);
Psychoanalytic and Psychodynamic Approaches (KSA)
3
392
8
.
A. The normal symbiotic phase ends at about 5 months of age.
The child is now aware of the mother, but there is not a sense of
individuality. The child and mother are one, and there is a barrier
between them and the rest of the world.
Question Assesses
554
Content Area III—Psychotherapy, Clinical Interventions, and Case
Management; The Intervention Process (Competency);
Psychoanalytic and Psychodynamic Approaches (KSA)
39. A. Sometimes missing appointments after achieving stated goals
can be an indicator that the client is ready to terminate. The client
may want to practice new skills independently and does not think
that there is a need to continue to see the social worker. There is
no indication that a new problem has emerged or the client is
dissatisfied. The client’s behavior most likely means that the client
is ready to stop seeing the social worker.
Question Assesses
Content Area III—Psychotherapy, Clinical Interventions, and Case
Management; The Intervention Process (Competency); The
Indicators of Client/Client System Readiness for Termination
(KSA)
40. A. Tertiary prevention focuses on managing complicated, long-
term diseases, injuries, or illnesses. The goal is to prevent further
deterioration and maximize quality of life because the disease is
now established. Other types of prevention strategies are aimed at
preventing the development of a disease and/or slowing its
progression or minimizing its long-term impacts.
Question Assesses
Content Area III—Psychotherapy, Clinical Interventions, and Case
Management; The Intervention Process (Competency); Primary,
Secondary, and Tertiary Prevention Strategies (KSA)
41. B. Medical necessity is a criterion used to determine whether
treatments and services are justified as reasonable, necessary,
and/or appropriate, based on evidence-based clinical standards of
care. Payment for services, as well as whether levels of care are
justified, uses medical necessity to assess whether treatment and
service requests are “reasonable and necessary” given clients
diagnoses and/or presenting problems.
555
Question Assesses
Content Area III—Psychotherapy, Clinical Interventions, and Case
Management; Service Delivery and Management of Cases
(Competency); The Effects of Policies, Procedures, Regulations,
and Legislation on Social Work Practice and Service Delivery
(KSA)
4
394
2
.
C. Social workers are charged with helping clients who have
experienced discrimination by making policy and/or system
changes. The social worker should not be seeking alternative
methods to assist the couple to become parents because they
have the right to adopt and desire to do so. Although they may
need support, developing coping skills will not BEST assist the
couple because these actions do not help them ultimately realize
parenthood through adoption which is their goal.
Question Assesses
Content Area III—Psychotherapy, Clinical Interventions, and Case
Management; Service Delivery and Management of Cases
(Competency); Theories and Methods of Advocacy for Policies,
Services, and Resources to Meet Clients’/Client Systems’ Needs
(KSA)
43. B. Social workers should make clear distinctions between
statements made and actions engaged in as private individuals as
opposed to those as representatives of their employing agencies.
The social worker did not protest on agency time or identify himself
in any way as an employee of the agency. He acted as a private
individual and, therefore, his actions are ethical.
Question Assesses
Content Area III—Psychotherapy, Clinical Interventions, and Case
Management; Service Delivery and Management of Cases
556
(Competency); Theories and Methods of Advocacy for Policies,
Services, and Resources to Meet Clients’/Client Systems’ Needs
(KSA)
44. C. The primary benefit of peer supervision is the reciproca
learning through the sharing of experiences. Peer supervision is
based on the use of feedback to assist with self-directed learning
and evaluation. Peer supervision is not always associated with
cost savings and this is not its biggest benefit if they do occur. In
order for peer supervision to be effective, it should occur regularly
and be scheduled, not just happen “on the fly.”
Question Assesses
Content Area III—Psychotherapy, Clinical Interventions, and Case
Management; Consultation and Interdisciplinary Collaboration
(Competency); Models of Supervision and Consultation (e.g.,
Individual, Peer, Group) (KSA)
45. B. If the social worker has concerns about the consultant’s
recommendations and thinks they will be detrimental to clients, the
social worker cannot ethically implement them, but must make
clear why such a decision is being made. The social worker should
not implement them because of the consultant’s educational
background and expertise. The social worker may want to find out
the opinions of others but regardless of these views, the socia
worker cannot implement recommendations that the social worker
feels are not in the best interest of clients.
Question Assesses
Content Area III—Psychotherapy, Clinical Interventions, and Case
Management; Consultation and Interdisciplinary Collaboration
(Competency); Consultation Approaches (e.g., Referrals to
Specialists) (KSA)
4
396
6
.
557
A. Social workers should seek the advice and counsel of
colleagues whenever such consultation is in the best interests of
clients but should only do so from colleagues who have
demonstrated knowledge, expertise, and competence related to
the subject of the consultation. Although willing, the colleague
probably does not have expertise and competence related to the
disorder because both social workers began working at the
agency upon graduation and this disorder is not commonly treated
in this setting. There is no conflict of interest in having a colleague
in the same agency provide consultation if the colleague has the
requisite knowledge and skills.
Question Assesses
Content Area III—Psychotherapy, Clinical Interventions, and Case
Management; Consultation and Interdisciplinary Collaboration
(Competency); Consultation Approaches (e.g., Referrals to
Specialists) (KSA)
39
8
558
399
Content Area IV: Professional
Values and Ethics (19%)400
559
CHAPTER401
11
Professional Values and Ethical
Issues
LEGAL AND/OR ETHICAL ISSUES RELATED TO THE
PRACTICE OF SOCIAL WORK, INCLUDING
RESPONSIBILITY TO CLIENTS/CLIENT SYSTEMS,
COLLEAGUES, THE PROFESSION, AND SOCIETY
Social workers frequently encounter ethical and legal issues. In most
instances, ethical and legal standards complement each other.
However, in some circumstances, ethical and legal standards conflict.
The ethical standards for social workers are outlined in the NASW
Code of Ethics. With regard to legal mandates, social workers must be
aware of five distinct sets of requirements: constitutional law, statutory
law, regulatory law, court-made/common law, and executive orders.
Ethical and legal issues encountered by social workers fall into four
distinct categories:
1. Actions that are compatible with both legal and ethical standards
social work (legal and ethical)
2. Actions that are neither legal nor ethical in social work according
prevailing standards (not legal and not ethical)
3. Actions that are legal, but not ethical according to prevailin
standards (legal, but not ethical)
4. Actions that are ethical, but not legal according to standards an
560
laws (ethical, but not legal)
When there are conflicts between ethical and legal standards, a
social worker should identify the mandates that conflict. A social worker
should also identify the individuals, groups, and organizations that are
likely to be affected by the outcome of the conflict. All possible courses
of action and the benefits and risks of each alternative should be
considered, including the reasons supporting and in opposition to each
possibility. Resolution of conflicts should not be done in a vacuum and
a social worker should consult with colleagues and appropriate experts.
All steps in the decision-making process should be documented. Once
a decision is made, the results should be monitored and evaluated.
The NASW Code of Ethics states that all ethical standards are
402
applicable to interactions, relationships, or communications,
whether they occur in person or with the use of technology (NASW
Code of Ethics—Purpose of the NASW Code of Ethics). Technology-
assisted social work services include all aspects of practice involving
the use of computers, mobile or landline telephones, online social
media, chat rooms, text messaging, email, and emerging digital
applications.
Social workers who use technology in the provision of social work
services should ensure that they have the knowledge and skills to
provide such services competently, including understanding the special
communication challenges when using technology and implementing
strategies to address these challenges. Additionally, these social
workers should comply with the laws governing technology and social
work practice in the jurisdictions in which they are regulated and
located and, as applicable, in the jurisdictions in which clients are
located (NASW Code of Ethics—Competence).
TECHNIQUES TO IDENTIFY AND RESOLVE ETHICAL
DILEMMAS
An ethical dilemma is a predicament when a social worker must decide
between two viable solutions that seem to have similar ethical value.
Sometimes two viable ethical solutions can conflict with each other.
Social workers should be aware of any conflicts between personal and
professional values and deal with them responsibly.
561
In instances where social workers’ ethical obligations conflict with
agency policies or relevant laws or regulations, they should make a
responsible effort to resolve the conflict in a manner that is consistent
with the ethical values, principles, and standards.
In order to resolve this conflict, ethical problem solving is needed.
Essential Steps in Ethical Problem Solving
1. Identify ethical standards, as defined by the professional code
ethics, that are being compromised (always go to the NASW Cod
of Ethics. First—do not rely on supervisor or coworkers).
2. Determine whether there is an ethical issue or dilemma.
3. Weigh ethical issues in light of key social work values and principle
as defined by the NASW Code of Ethics.
4. Suggest modifications in light of the prioritized ethical values an
principles that are central to the dilemma.
5. Implement modifications in light of prioritized ethical values an
principles.
6. Monitor for new ethical issues or dilemmas.
THE CLIENT’S/CLIENT SYSTEM’S RIGHT TO REFUSE
SERVICES (E.G., MEDICATION, MEDICAL TREATMENT,
COUNSELING, PLACEMENT, ETC.)
Social workers should provide services to clients only in the context of
a professional relationship based, when appropriate, on valid informed
consent. Social workers should use clear and understandable
403
language to inform clients of the purpose of the services, risks
related to the services, limits to services because of the requirements
of a third-party payer, relevant costs, reasonable alternatives, clients’
right to refuse or withdraw consent, and the time frame covered by the
consent. Social workers should provide clients with an opportunity to
ask questions (NASW Code of Ethics—Informed Consent).
In instances when clients are receiving services involuntarily, social
workers should provide information about the nature and extent of
562
services and about the extent of clients’ right to refuse service (NASW
Code of Ethics—Informed Consent).
PROFESSIONAL BOUNDARIES IN THE SOCIAL WORKER–
CLIENT/CLIENT SYSTEM RELATIONSHIP (E.G., POWER
DIFFERENCES, CONFLICTS OF INTEREST, ETC.)
Many standards speak to the professional boundaries that social
workers should maintain with clients. These include those related to
sexual relationships, physical contact, and sexual harassment.
The standards that govern social work practice address the use of
physical contact with clients. Setting clear, appropriate, and sensitive
boundaries that govern physical contact are essential for professional
practice (NASW Code of Ethics—Physical Contact). Social workers
should not engage in physical contact with clients when there is a
possibility of psychological harm to a client as a result of the contact
(such as cradling or caressing clients).
Physical contact or other activities of a sexual nature with clients
are clearly not allowed by social workers.
Social workers should under no circumstances engage in sexual
activities, inappropriate sexual communications through the use of
technology or in person, or sexual contact with current clients, whether
such contact is consensual or forced (NASW Code of Ethics—Sexual
Relationships).
Social workers should not engage in sexual activities or sexual
contact with clients’ relatives or other individuals with whom clients
maintain a close personal relationship when there is a risk of
exploitation or potential harm to a client. Sexual activity or sexual
contact with clients’ relatives or other individuals with whom clients
maintain a personal relationship has the potential to be harmful to a
client and may make it difficult for a social worker and client to maintain
appropriate professional boundaries. Social workers—not their clients,
their clients’ relatives, or other individuals with whom a client maintains
a personal relationship—assume the full burden for setting clear,
appropriate, and culturally sensitive boundaries (NASW Code of Ethics
—Sexual Relationships).
Social workers should not engage in sexual activities or sexual
contact with former clients because of the potential for harm to a client.
563
If social workers engage in conduct contrary to this prohibition or claim
that an exception to this prohibition is warranted because of
extraordinary circumstances, it is social workers—not their clients—
who assume the full burden of demonstrating that the former client has
not been exploited, coerced, or manipulated, intentionally or
unintentionally (NASW Code of Ethics—Sexual Relationships).
Social workers should not provide clinical services to individuals with
whom they have had a prior sexual relationship. Providing clinical
services to a former sexual partner has the potential to be harmful to
the individual and is likely to make it difficult for a social worker and
404
individual to maintain appropriate professional boundaries (NASW
Code of Ethics—Sexual Relationships).
In addition, social workers should not sexually harass supervisees,
students, trainees, colleagues, or clients, including sexual advances,
sexual solicitation, requests for sexual favors, and other verbal, written,
electronic, or physical conduct of a sexual nature (NASW Code of
Ethics—Sexual Harassment).
Social workers should avoid communication with clients using
technology (such as social networking sites, online chat, e-mail, text
messages, telephone, and video) for personal or non-work-related
purposes and be aware that posting personal information on
professional websites or other media might cause boundary confusion,
inappropriate dual relationships, or harm to clients. Social workers
should avoid accepting requests from or engaging in personal
relationships with clients on social networking sites or other electronic
media (NASW Code of Ethics—Conflicts of Interest).
Clients may discover social workers’ posts and interactions on
websites, social media, and other forms of technology. Such
involvement may affect the ability of social workers to work effectively
with some clients (NASW Code of Ethics—Conflicts of Interest).
ETHICAL ISSUES RELATED TO DUAL RELATIONSHIPS
Social workers must ensure that they do not engage in dual or multiple
relationships that may impact on the treatment of clients. The
standards related to this area provide guidelines that can assist social
workers if such relationships emerge (NASW Code of Ethics—Conflicts
of Interest).
564
Social workers should be alert to and avoid conflicts of interest that
interfere with the exercise of professional discretion and impartial
judgment. Social workers should inform clients when a real or potential
conflict of interest arises and take reasonable steps to resolve the issue
in a manner that makes clients’ interests primary and protects clients’
interests to the greatest extent possible. In some cases, protecting
clients’ interests may require termination of the professional
relationship with proper referral of clients (NASW Code of Ethics—
Conflicts of Interest).
Social workers should not take unfair advantage of any professional
relationship or exploit others to further their personal, religious, political,
or business interests (NASW Code of Ethics—Conflicts of Interest).
Social workers should not engage in dual or multiple relationships
with clients or former clients in which there is a risk of exploitation or
potential harm to a client. In instances when dual or multiple
relationships are unavoidable, social workers should take steps to
protect clients and are responsible for setting clear, appropriate, and
culturally sensitive boundaries. Dual or multiple relationships occur
when social workers relate to clients in more than one relationship,
whether professional, social, or business. Dual or multiple relationships
can occur simultaneously or consecutively (NASW Code of Ethics—
Conflicts of Interest).
When social workers provide services to two or more people who have
a relationship with each other (e.g., couples, family members), social
workers should clarify with all parties which individuals will be
considered clients and the nature of social workers’ professional
obligations to the various individuals who are receiving services. Social
workers who anticipate a conflict of interest among the individuals
receiving services or who anticipate having to perform in potentially
405
conflicting roles (e.g., when a social worker is asked to testify in a
child custody dispute or divorce proceedings involving clients) should
clarify their role with the parties involved and take appropriate action to
minimize any conflict of interest (NASW Code of Ethics—Conflicts of
Interest).
In addition, social workers engaged in evaluation or research
should be alert to and avoid conflicts of interest and dual relationships
with participants, should inform participants when a real or potential
conflict of interest arises, and should take steps to resolve the issue in
565
a manner that makes participants’ interests primary (NASW Code of
Ethics—Evaluation and Research).
SELF-DISCLOSURE PRINCIPLES AND APPLICATIONS
The decision about whether to disclose personal information by a social
worker often arises in practice because the social worker–client
relationship involves the discussion of intimate topics. Some self-
disclosure by a social worker may be harmless and even
therapeutically useful as it can help clients connect during engagement
and/or realize that they are not the only ones who have experienced
similar problems.
However, some self-disclosure is exploitative, self-serving, and
harmful to clients. Many boundary violations begin as a result of social
workers discussing personal information with clients. Though not
intended to be the start of friendships or more intimate relationships,
self-disclosure by social workers, perhaps well meaning, can blur the
boundaries between professional and personal relationships.
Sometimes social workers disclose personal information because
they have experienced trauma or other problems which have not been
adequately addressed and they are looking to connect with others in
order to cope with their own challenges. Social workers may also self-
disclose about problems because they think that clients can help them
in some way, such as giving them legal advice if the clients are
lawyers.
Sometimes clients learn personal information about social workers
unexpectedly. For example, a social worker may run into a client at a
community activity. These events cannot be anticipated and provide
personal information to a client about a social worker that the social
worker would prefer not to have been revealed.
Most therapeutic situations require no self-disclosure by a social
worker. In fact, a client having information about a social worker’s
family, personal interests, and/or relationship status can be an
indication of a potential boundary violation.
Prior to disclosing any information about themselves, social workers
should engage in consultation or supervision about why such
disclosure is being considered and why it is professionally justified in
this instance. Only when it will clearly assist clients and there are no
566
other methods for achieving the same outcome should it be
contemplated. Better understanding by social workers about their own
desire to self-disclose is necessary in order to prevent boundary
crossings which are harmful to clients.
THE PRINCIPLES AND PROCESSES OF OBTAINING
INFORMED CONSENT
In instances when clients are not literate or have difficulty
understanding the primary language used in the practice setting, social
workers should take steps to ensure clients’ comprehension. This
406
may include providing clients with a detailed verbal explanation or
arranging for a qualified interpreter or translator whenever possible
(NASW Code of Ethics—Informed Consent).
In instances when clients lack the capacity to provide informed
consent, social workers should protect clients’ interests by seeking
permission from an appropriate third party, informing clients consistent
with clients’ level of understanding. In such instances, social workers
should seek to ensure that the third party acts in a manner consistent
with the clients’ wishes and interests. Social workers should take
reasonable steps to enhance such clients’ ability to give informed
consent (NASW Code of Ethics—Informed Consent).
Social workers who provide services using technology should
inform recipients of the limitations and risks associated with such
services (NASW Code of Ethics—Informed Consent).
Social workers should obtain clients’ informed consent before
audiotaping or videotaping clients or permitting observation of services
to clients by a third party (NASW Code of Ethics—Informed Consent).
Social workers should obtain client consent before conducting
electronic searches on clients except when needed to protect clients or
others from serious, foreseeable, and imminent harm, or for other
compelling professional reasons (NASW Code of Ethics—Informed
Consent).
Social workers should discuss policies with clients concerning the
use of technology in the provision of professional services. Social
workers who use technology to provide social work services should
assess the clients’ suitability and capacity for electronic and remote
services. Social workers should consider the clients’ intellectual,
567
emotional, and physical ability to use technology to receive services
and the clients’ ability to understand the potential benefits, risks, and
limitations of such services. If clients do not wish to use services
provided through technology, social workers should help them identify
alternate methods of service (NASW Code of Ethics—Informed
Consent).
Social workers who use technology to provide social work services
should obtain informed consent from clients prior to initiating services.
Social workers should assess clients’ capacity to provide informed
consent and, when using technology to communicate, verify the identity
and location of clients (NASW Code of Ethics—Informed Consent).
When social workers act on behalf of clients who lack the capacity
to make informed decisions, social workers should take reasonable
steps to safeguard the interests and rights of those clients (NASW
Code of Ethics—Clients Who Lack Decision-Making Capacity).
In order to obtain informed consent, social workers must use clear
and understandable language related to service purpose, risks, limits
due to third-party payers, time frame, and right of refusal or withdrawal.
If the client lacks capacity or is a minor informed consent must be
obtained by a responsible third party and assent must be obtained
from the client.
LEGAL AND/OR ETHICAL ISSUES REGARDING
DOCUMENTATION
In addition to maintaining confidentiality of client records, there are
many other obligations related to documentation that social workers
must consider in order to follow legal and/or ethical standards.
It is important to document the purpose, goals, plans, services,
407
interventions, and referrals offered and provided to clients.
Assessments, evaluations, recommendations, and circumstances of
termination should also be documented in the client record.
Consultations with supervisors and other professionals and rationale
for practice decisions should be documented as well. Client records
should include informed consent and release of information documents.
All information relevant to client contact should be stated in clear,
accurate terms. False, inaccurate, or misleading information in a client
568
record is unethical and may be potentially harmful to clients and pose a
liability risk to social workers. It is unethical to alter case notes after the
fact. If necessary, social workers should add new notes with current
dates indicating that, in review, past entries were found to be
inaccurately documented and correction of those inaccuracies should
be clearly stated.
In an effort to ensure continuity of service, it is imperative that client
contact be documented in a timely, thorough, and accurate manner.
Timely documentation is required for optimal service continuity when
clients are transferred from one staff member to another in an agency
or when clients are referred out of the agency to collaborating
agencies. In addition, accurate and timely records are required by
insurers, funding agencies, and so on. Lastly, documentation of
significant aspects of client contact is also critical to protecting social
workers in the event of lawsuits or ethics complaints.
Client contact documentation should include social history,
assessment, treatment plans, intervention strategies, dates and times
of contacts, methods of evaluation of progress, reasons for termination,
documentation of informed consent and release of information
signatures, contacts with all third parties, consultation with collaborating
professionals, explanation of social worker’s reasoning regarding
decisions, recommendations, interventions, and referrals and
documentation of any critical incidents. Documentation should be
completed as soon as possible after contact so as to ensure accuracy
and to maintain up-to-date information in the record in the event of an
emergency or the social workers’ absence or incapacitation that would
require another professional to intervene.
Social workers should only include relevant information that is
directly related to client issues for the purpose of service provided.
Client records should not include subjective or speculative observation,
or any extraneous and irrelevant information.
Social workers must be familiar with legal and ethical protections
available for clients—including keeping psychotherapy notes in
locations which are secure, but separate from clients’ files to provide
additional confidentiality protections.
LEGAL AND/OR ETHICAL ISSUES REGARDING
TERMINATION
569
Social workers should terminate services to clients and professional
relationships with them when such services and relationships are no
longer required or no longer serve client needs or interests (NASW
Code of Ethics—Termination of Services).
Social workers should take reasonable steps to avoid abandoning
clients who are still in need of services. Social workers should withdraw
services precipitously only under unusual circumstances, giving careful
consideration to all factors in the situation and taking care to minimize
possible adverse effects. Social workers should assist in making
appropriate arrangements for continuation of services when necessary
(NASW Code of Ethics—Termination of Services).
Social workers in fee-for-service settings may terminate services to
408
clients who are not paying an overdue balance if the financial
contractual arrangements have been made clear to a client, if a client
does not pose an imminent danger to self or others, and if the clinical
and other consequences of the current nonpayment have been
addressed and discussed with a client (NASW Code of Ethics—
Termination of Services).
Social workers should not terminate services to pursue a social,
financial, or sexual relationship with a client (NASW Code of Ethics—
Termination of Services).
Social workers who anticipate the termination or interruption of
services to clients should notify clients promptly and seek the transfer,
referral, or continuation of services in relation to client needs and
preferences (NASW Code of Ethics—Termination of Services).
Social workers who are leaving an employment setting should
inform clients of appropriate options for the continuation of services and
of the benefits and risks of the options (NASW Code of Ethics—
Termination of Services).
It is unethical to continue to treat clients when services are no
longer needed or in their best interests.
Another standard also relevant to termination of services mandates
that social workers should make reasonable efforts to ensure continuity
of services in the event that services are interrupted by factors such as
unavailability, relocation, illness, disability, or death (NASW Code of
Ethics—Interruption of Services).
570
LEGAL AND/OR ETHICAL ISSUES RELATED TO DEATH
AND DYING
There are many legal and/or ethical issues related to death and dying.
Some legal issues involved with dying include, but are not limited to,
clients’ right to have informed consent to receive or refuse treatment,
advance directives, and establishing living wills. Treating professionals,
by law, must give clients the opportunity for informed consent. It
involves explaining the options for treatment, the possible benefits as
well as risks for each treatment, and any recommendations, with
rationales, for one treatment over another. Furthermore, clients must
know that they have the right to choose whatever treatment they want
or to choose to refuse treatment. Particularly when discussing chronic
or terminal illness, conditions over which there is little control over the
ultimate outcome of care provided, having clients feel as much control
over their treatment options as possible is of great importance.
Clients can give written directions, called advance directives, about
the type of care they do and do not want to receive when dying.
Advance directives are legal written agreements that will be honored in
the future when people can no longer communicate their wishes. For
example, advance directives can prohibit resuscitation (the act of trying
to revive a person whose heart has stopped) or tube feeding, if clients
wish.
Advance directives are legal documents which indicate who has the
right to make decisions when clients are incapable physically or
mentally of making their wants known. The purpose of advance
directives is to respond to judicial decisions that have been made
indicating that if clients have not made others aware of their wishes, the
decision to remove them from life supports or place them on life
supports cannot be made. Therefore, it has become increasingly
imperative that advance directives be established to memorialize
clients’ wishes and identify individuals to make these decisions if
needed.
Advance directives have been paired with living wills to give clients
409
control over what happens to them in a severe illness or injury. A
living will allows individuals to retain some control over what happens
at the end of their lives, even if they are then no longer competent to
make personal choices for terminal care, by specifying their wishes
571
while they are still healthy and at a time when there is no doubt of their
mental competence.
Clients whose death may occur soon should also have Physician
Orders for Life-Sustaining Treatment (POLST) documents. These
documents are written doctors’ orders that reflect preferences for
medical care (particularly whether to receive care or not). The
documents are kept in clients’ medical records and in the home and are
used to direct emergency medical personnel in following the clients’
preferences. For example, these documents may contain the doctors’
orders as to whether people should receive cardiopulmonary
resuscitation (CPR), transportation to hospitals, or aggressive
treatments (such as blood transfusions or chemotherapy) to relieve
symptoms even if death is inevitable.
Although very few people actually take any steps toward causing
their own death, many clients who are dying at least consider suicide.
Discussing suicide may help sort out the issues and often correct
certain problems that prompted consideration of suicide. Pain medicine
can be prescribed if clients are uncomfortable and spiritual guidance
can help clients find meaning in the remainder of their lives. Making
decisions to forgo life-sustaining treatment, forgo food and fluids when
near death, or take many drugs or large doses of drugs to relieve
symptoms is not considered suicide. Several states have passed laws
which allow those who are terminally ill to receive lethal combinations
of drugs to take when they decide to die.
RESEARCH ETHICS (E.G., INSTITUTIONAL REVIEW
BOARDS, USE OF HUMAN SUBJECTS, INFORMED
CONSENT)
Social workers have an ethical mandate to monitor and evaluate
policies, the implementation of programs, and practice interventions.
They also must promote and facilitate evaluation and research to
contribute to the development of knowledge. In addition to doing
research themselves, social workers must keep current with emerging
knowledge relevant to social work and fully use evaluation and
research evidence in their professional practice.
When doing research and evaluation, social workers must consider
possible consequences and should follow guidelines developed for the
572
protection of evaluation and research participants. Social workers must
protect participants from unwarranted physical or mental distress,
harm, danger, or deprivation (NASW Code of Ethics—Evaluation and
Research). Appropriate institutional review boards should be consulted.
For example, social workers engaged in evaluation or research
should obtain voluntary and written informed consent from participants,
when appropriate, without any implied or actual deprivation or penalty
for refusal to participate or without undue inducement to participate.
Informed consent should include information about the nature, extent,
and duration of the participation requested and disclosure of the risks
and benefits of participation in the research (NASW Code of Ethics—
Evaluation and Research).
When using electronic technology to facilitate evaluation or research,
social workers should ensure that participants provide informed
consent for the use of such technology. Social workers should assess
whether participants are able to use the technology and, when
appropriate, offer reasonable alternatives to participate in the
410
evaluation or research (NASW Code of Ethics—Evaluation and
Research).
When evaluation or research participants are incapable of giving
informed consent, social workers should provide an appropriate
explanation to the participants, obtain the participants’ assent to the
extent they are able, and obtain written consent from an appropriate
proxy (NASW Code of Ethics—Evaluation and Research).
Social workers should never design or conduct evaluation or
research that does not use consent procedures, such as certain forms
of naturalistic observation and archival research, unless rigorous and
responsible review of the research has found it to be justified because
of its prospective scientific, educational, or applied value and unless
equally effective alternative procedures that do not involve waiver of
consent are not feasible (NASW Code of Ethics—Evaluation and
Research).
Social workers should inform participants of their right to withdraw
from evaluation and research at any time without penalty (NASW Code
of Ethics—Evaluation and Research).
Social workers should take appropriate steps to ensure that
participants in evaluation and research have access to appropriate
573
supportive services (NASW Code of Ethics—Evaluation and
Research).
Social workers engaged in evaluation or research should ensure
the anonymity or confidentiality of participants and of the data obtained
from them. Social workers should inform participants of any limits of
confidentiality, the measures that will be taken to ensure confidentiality,
and when any records containing research data will be destroyed
(NASW Code of Ethics—Evaluation and Research).
Social workers engaged in evaluation or research should be alert to
and avoid conflicts of interest and dual relationships with participants,
should inform participants when a real or potential conflict of interest
arises, and should take steps to resolve the issue in a manner that
makes participants’ interests primary (NASW Code of Ethics—
Evaluation and Research).
ETHICAL ISSUES IN SUPERVISION AND MANAGEMENT
Social workers must follow all ethical standards when providing and
receiving supervision, as well as engaging in management tasks.
These include, but are not limited to, those regarding commitment to
clients, self-determination, informed consent, competence, cultural
awareness and social diversity, conflicts of interest, privacy and
confidentiality, access to records, sexual relationships, physical
contact, sexual harassment, derogatory language, payments, clients
who lack decision-making capacity, and interruption or termination of
services.
Social workers who provide supervision should have the necessary
knowledge and skill to supervise or consult appropriately, and they
should do so only within their areas of competence. They should also
evaluate supervisees’ performance in a manner that is fair and
respectful (NASW Code of Ethics—Supervision and Consultation).
Social workers who are in managerial roles should take reasonable
steps to ensure that adequate agency resources are available to
provide appropriate staff supervision (NASW Code of Ethics—
Administration).
Social workers who provide supervision are responsible for setting
clear, appropriate, and culturally sensitive boundaries. They should not
engage in any dual or multiple relationships with supervisees when
574
there is a risk of exploitation of or potential harm to the supervisee,
411
including dual relationships that may arise while using social
networking sites or other electronic media (NASW Code of Ethics—
Supervision and Consultation).
Social workers in managerial roles should advocate within and
outside their agencies for adequate resources to meet clients’ needs
and ensure resource allocation procedures are open, fair, and
nondiscriminatory. Social work managers should ensure that working
environments are consistent with the NASW Code of Ethics and
eliminate conditions which are not (NASW Code of Ethics—
Administration).
Sometimes in practice, ethical issues can arise related to the
payment of services. These standards indicate what rules social
workers should follow in these situations.
When setting fees, social workers should ensure that the fees are
fair, reasonable, and commensurate with the services performed.
Consideration should be given to clients’ ability to pay (NASW Code of
Ethics—Payment for Services).
Social workers should avoid accepting goods or services from
clients as payment for professional services. Bartering arrangements,
particularly involving services, create the potential for conflicts of
interest, exploitation, and inappropriate boundaries in social workers’
relationships with clients. Social workers should explore and may
participate in bartering only in very limited circumstances when it can
be demonstrated that such arrangements are an accepted practice
among professionals in the local community, considered to be essential
for the provision of services, negotiated without coercion, and entered
into at a client’s initiative and with a client’s informed consent. Social
workers who accept goods or services from clients as payment for
professional services assume the full burden of demonstrating that this
arrangement will not be detrimental to a client or the professional
relationship (NASW Code of Ethics—Payment for Services).
Social workers should not solicit a private fee or other remuneration
for providing services to clients who are entitled to such available
services through social workers’ employers or agencies (NASW Code
of Ethics—Payment for Services).
Social workers should obtain information on procedures for using
insurance coverage when a client wants to use an employee benefit
575
package for behavioral health services.
METHODS TO CREATE, IMPLEMENT, AND EVALUATE
POLICIES AND PROCEDURES FOR SOCIAL WORKER
SAFETY
Social workers provide services in increasingly complex, dynamic
social environments with many client populations. The number and
variety of people to whom social workers provide services and the
variety of settings in which these services are provided contribute to an
increasingly unpredictable, and often unsafe, environment for social
work practice. Social workers have been the targets of verbal and
physical assaults in agencies, as well as during field visits with clients.
Tragically, some social workers have also been permanently injured or
have lost their lives.
Most clients and families that social workers serve do not present
threats or pose danger. In instances where threats are present, most
employers address these issues appropriately. There are, however,
social work settings where social workers face increased risks of
violence.
Social workers have the right to work in safe environments and to
advocate for safe working conditions. Social workers who report
concerns regarding their personal safety, or who request assistance in
assuring their safety, should not fear retaliation, blame, or
412
questioning of their competency from their supervisors or
colleagues. Social workers should routinely practice universal safety
precautions in their work. Violence occurs in every economic, social,
gender, and racial group. To avoid stereotyping particular groups of
people and to promote safety, social workers should practice safety
assessment and risk reduction with all clients and in all settings. A
thorough understanding of the risk factors associated with elevated risk
for violence can inform safety assessments. Social workers should also
be aware of the potential that their personal information on the Internet,
particularly social networking sites, can be accessed by anyone.
Universal safety precautions also include the establishment of safety
plans as a matter of routine planning. The adoption of universal safety
precautions should not preclude agencies from establishing particular
safeguards when social workers are asked to perform dangerous tasks.
576
In those situations, agencies should establish specific policies to
reduce the risk of harm.
577
CHAPTER413
12
Confidentiality
THE USE OF CLIENT/CLIENT SYSTEM RECORDS
Social workers should provide clients with reasonable access to their
records. Social workers who are concerned that clients’ access to
their records could cause serious misunderstanding or harm to a
client should provide assistance in interpreting the records and
consultation with a client regarding the records. Social workers
should limit clients’ access to their records, or portions
of their records, only in exceptional circumstances
when there is compelling evidence that such access
would cause serious harm to a client. Both clients’ requests
and the rationale for withholding some or all of the records should be
documented in clients’ files (NASW Code of Ethics—Access to
Records).
Social workers should develop and inform clients about their
policies on the use of technology to provide clients with access to
their records. These policies must be consistent with prevailing
social work ethical standards (NASW Code of Ethics—Access to
Records).
When providing clients with access to their records, social
workers should take steps to protect the confidentiality of other
individuals identified or discussed in such records.
The NASW Code of Ethics states that a social worker
should only solicit information essential for providing
578
services (minimum necessary to achieve purpose).
Once private information is shared, standards of
confidentiality apply.
LEGAL AND/OR ETHICAL ISSUES REGARDING
CONFIDENTIALITY, INCLUDING ELECTRONIC
INFORMATION SECURITY
Social workers should respect clients’ right to privacy. Social workers
should not solicit private information from clients unless it is essential
to providing services or conducting social work evaluation or
research. Once private information is shared, standards of
confidentiality apply (NASW Code of Ethics—Privacy and
Confidentiality).
Social workers may disclose confidential information when
appropriate with valid consent from a client or a person legally
authorized to consent on behalf of a client (NASW Code of Ethics—
Privacy and Confidentiality).
Social workers should protect the confidentiality of all information
414
obtained in the course of professional service, except for
compelling professional reasons. The general expectation that social
workers will keep information confidential does not apply when
disclosure is necessary to prevent serious, foreseeable, and
imminent harm to a client or others. In all instances, social workers
should disclose the least amount of confidential information
necessary to achieve the desired purpose; only information that is
directly relevant to the purpose for which the disclosure is made
should be revealed (NASW Code of Ethics—Privacy and
Confidentiality).
Social workers should inform clients, to the extent possible, about
the disclosure of confidential information and the potential
consequences, when feasible, before the disclosure is made. This
applies whether social workers disclose confidential information on
the basis of a legal requirement or client consent (NASW Code of
Ethics—Privacy and Confidentiality).
579
Social workers should discuss with clients and other interested
parties the nature of confidentiality and limitations of clients’ right to
confidentiality. Social workers should review circumstances with
clients where confidential information may be requested and where
disclosure of confidential information may be legally required. This
discussion should occur as soon as possible in a social worker–
client relationship and as needed throughout the course of the
relationship (NASW Code of Ethics—Privacy and Confidentiality).
When social workers provide counseling services to families,
couples, or groups, social workers should seek agreement among
the parties involved concerning each individual’s right to
confidentiality and obligation to preserve the confidentiality of
information shared by others. This agreement should include
consideration of whether confidential information may be exchanged
in person or electronically. Social workers should inform participants
in family, couples, or group counseling that social workers cannot
guarantee that all participants will honor such agreements (NASW
Code of Ethics—Privacy and Confidentiality).
Social workers should inform clients involved in family, couples,
marital, or group counseling of a social worker’s, employer’s, and
agency’s policy concerning a social worker’s disclosure of
confidential information among the parties involved in the counseling
(NASW Code of Ethics—Privacy and Confidentiality).
Social workers should not disclose confidential information to
third-party payers unless clients have authorized such disclosure
(NASW Code of Ethics—Privacy and Confidentiality).
Social workers should not discuss confidential information in any
setting unless privacy can be ensured. Social workers should not
discuss confidential information in public or semipublic areas such as
hallways, waiting rooms, elevators, and restaurants (NASW Code of
Ethics—Privacy and Confidentiality).
Social workers should protect the confidentiality of clients during
legal proceedings to the extent permitted by law. When a court of law
or other legally authorized body orders social workers to disclose
confidential or privileged information without a client’s consent and
such disclosure could cause harm to a client, social workers should
request that the court withdraw the order or limit the order as
580
narrowly as possible or maintain the records under seal, unavailable
for public inspection (NASW Code of Ethics—Privacy and
Confidentiality).
A subpoena and court order are not the same. When receiving a
subpoena, a social worker should respond and claim privilege, but
not turn over records unless the court issues a subsequent order to
do so. As stated, when a social worker gets a court order, the social
worker should try to limit its scope and/or ask that the records be
sealed.
Social workers should protect the confidentiality of clients when
415
responding to requests from members of the media (NASW
Code of Ethics—Privacy and Confidentiality).
Social workers should protect the confidentiality of clients’ written
and electronic records and other sensitive information. Social
workers should take reasonable steps to ensure that clients’ records
are stored in a secure location and that clients’ records are not
available to others who are not authorized to have access (NASW
Code of Ethics—Privacy and Confidentiality).
Social workers should take reasonable steps to protect the
confidentiality of electronic communications, including information
provided to clients or third parties. Social workers should use
applicable safeguards (such as encryption, firewalls, and passwords)
when using electronic communications such as e-mail, online posts,
online chat sessions, mobile communication, and text messages. In
addition, social workers should develop and disclose policies and
procedures for notifying clients of any breach of confidential
information in a timely manner. In the event of unauthorized access
to client records or information, including any unauthorized access to
the social worker’s electronic communication or storage systems,
social workers should inform clients of such disclosures, consistent
with applicable laws and professional standards (NASW Code of
Ethics—Privacy and Confidentiality).
Social workers should develop and inform clients about their
policies on the use of electronic technology to gather information
about clients. Social workers should avoid searching or gathering
client information electronically unless there are compelling
professional reasons, and when appropriate, with the client’s
581
informed consent (NASW Code of Ethics—Privacy and
Confidentiality).
Social workers should avoid posting any identifying
or confidential information about clients on
professional websites or other forms of social media
(NASW Code of Ethics—Privacy and Confidentiality).
Social workers should transfer or dispose of clients’ records in a
manner that protects clients’ confidentiality and is consistent with
state statutes governing records and social work licensure (NASW
Code of Ethics—Privacy and Confidentiality).
Social workers should take reasonable precautions to protect
client confidentiality in the event of a social worker’s termination of
practice, incapacitation, or death (NASW Code of Ethics—Privacy
and Confidentiality).
Social workers should not disclose identifying information when
discussing clients for teaching or training purposes unless a client
has consented to disclosure of confidential information (NASW Code
of Ethics—Privacy and Confidentiality).
Social workers should not disclose identifying information when
discussing clients with consultants unless a client has consented to
disclosure of confidential information or there is a compelling need
for such disclosure (NASW Code of Ethics—Privacy and
Confidentiality).
Social workers should protect the confidentiality of deceased
clients consistent with the preceding standards (NASW Code of
Ethics—Privacy and Confidentiality).
If a client sues a social worker, a social worker has the right to a
defense and may need to release client information as part of this
defense. A social worker should limit this disclosure only to
information required for defense.
Confidentiality of minor records can be challenging, especially if a
parent wants access to them and/or consents to their release. Social
workers must be knowledgeable about ethical standards and laws
that relate to the protection and release of minor records. Parents
may have access to these records depending upon the age of the
minor and the type of treatment or setting. Social workers
416
582
treating minors with parents who may have joint or limited custody
must also be aware of the rights of all parties to access and/or
consent to their release.
LEGAL AND/OR ETHICAL ISSUES REGARDING
MANDATORY REPORTING (E.G., ABUSE, THREAT OF
HARM, IMPAIRED PROFESSIONALS, ETC.)
Social workers are required to disclose confidential information,
sometimes against a client’s wishes, to comply with mandatory
reporting laws. Laws not only require social workers to report
suspected cases of abuse and neglect, but there can be varying
levels of civil and criminal liability for failing to do so.
This mandate causes ethical issues for social workers who have
a commitment to their clients’ interests as well as a responsibility to
the larger society.
The majority of all reports of abuse and/or neglect came from
professionals including medical personnel, law enforcement agents,
educators, lawyers, and social workers.
Social workers who have direct knowledge of a social work
colleague’s impairment that is due to personal problems,
psychosocial distress, substance abuse, or mental health difficulties
and that interferes with practice effectiveness should consult with
that colleague when feasible and assist the colleague in taking
remedial action. Social workers who believe that a social work
colleague’s impairment interferes with practice effectiveness and that
the colleague has not taken adequate steps to address the
impairment should take action through appropriate channels
established by employers, agencies, NASW, licensing and regulatory
bodies, and other professional organizations (NASW Code of Ethics
—Impairment of Colleagues).
583
CHAPTER417
13
Professional Development and
Use of Self
PROFESSIONAL VALUES AND PRINCIPLES (E.G.,
COMPETENCE, SOCIAL JUSTICE, INTEGRITY, AND
DIGNITY AND WORTH OF THE PERSON)
The mission of the social work profession is rooted in a set of core
values. These core values are the foundation of social work practice:
■ Service
■ Social justice
■ Dignity and worth of the person
■ Importance of human relationships
■ Integrity
■ Competence
Professional ethics are based on these basic values and guide social
workers’ conduct. These standards are relevant to all social workers,
regardless of their professional functions, the settings in which they
work, or the populations they serve.
Professional ethics are “rules” based on the core values of the
profession that should be adhered to by social workers. They are
statements to the general public about what they can expect from a
social worker. These standards tell new social workers what is essential
584
for practice based on the profession’s core values. Social workers are
judged with regard to competency based on these standards.
Professional standards are also helpful in guiding social workers
when they are unsure about a course of action or conflicts arise.
The social work profession is based on the belief that every person
has dignity and worth. It is essential that social workers respect this
value and treat everyone in a caring and respectful fashion. Social
workers should also be mindful of individual differences, as well as
cultural and ethnic diversity.
Social workers should promote clients’ right to self-determination and
act as a resource to assist clients to address their own needs. Social
workers have a dual responsibility to clients and to the broader society
and must resolve any conflicts, in a socially responsible and ethical
manner, that arise due to this dual mandate.
PROFESSIONAL OBJECTIVITY IN THE SOCIAL
WORKER–CLIENT/CLIENT SYSTEM RELATIONSHIP
418
Social worker communication should not be burdened with emotional
investment; instead, social workers should be interested, genuinely
concerned, and encouraging, while neither condemning nor praising.
The relationship between a social worker and a client must be
productive, and must have certain characteristics. There must be mutual
acceptance and trust. A client must feel understood and valued as a
person, though personal performance may be unsatisfactory. If a client
feels judged, the client will not speak freely, and will find way to defend
current and past actions.
A social worker accepts and understands a client’s problems,
recognizes the demands and the requirements of the situation, and
assists a client to examine alternatives and potential consequences. A
social worker does not tell a client what to do. Only a client can decide to
change because the client acts upon personal feelings and insights, and
has a unique view of the problem.
The social worker–client relationship is a social microcosm where
clients’ interpersonal behavioral and conditioned patterns of perceiving
and feeling are manifested. This relationship allows social workers to
see for themselves the interaction patterns and methods of
585
communication that have caused difficulties for clients in their everyday
lives.
Social workers should use various intervention techniques to assist
clients in identifying distorted perceptions and communication patterns
and replacing them with healthy, more constructive ones.
For example, social workers who observe that clients have poor
boundaries with them and/or engage in behaviors that interfere with
productive interactions during the problem-solving process can use limit
setting. Limit setting can be facilitative because clients do not feel safe
or accepted in a completely permissive environment. In addition, it is
important for clients to learn the importance of appropriate boundaries.
Social workers may also observe in the helping relationship that
clients are not assertive. Thus, they may use assertiveness training to
teach clients how to express their positive and negative feelings and to
stand up for their rights in ways that will not alienate others.
Learning self-observation skills and awareness of personal
preferences, as well as assuming personal responsibility, are important
components of the assertiveness training process.
One of the best ways that a social worker can assist a client when
observing a maladaptive behavior is by modeling, along with role play
and reinforcement, to produce behavioral change.
Social workers and clients should view the therapeutic environment
as a place to learn and practice new skills and relationship patterns that
can be used outside of this setting with others.
TECHNIQUES FOR PROTECTING AND ENHANCING
CLIENT/CLIENT SYSTEM SELF-DETERMINATION
Social workers respect and promote the right of clients to self-
determination and assist clients in their efforts to identify and clarify their
goals. Social workers may limit clients’ right to self-determination
419
when, in social workers’ professional judgment, clients’ actions or
potential actions pose serious, foreseeable, and imminent risk to
themselves or others (NASW Code of Ethics—Self-Determination).
CLIENT/CLIENT SYSTEM COMPETENCE AND SELF-
DETERMINATION (E.G., FINANCIAL DECISIONS,
586
TREATMENT DECISIONS, EMANCIPATION, AGE OF
CONSENT, PERMANENCY PLANNING)
Self-determination, the concept that clients are qualified to make their
own decisions about their lives, is a central concept in the social work
profession. It is described in the NASW Code of Ethics as one of a social
worker’s primary ethical responsibilities. Using a strengths-based
perspective, all clients are assumed to be competent to make their own
decisions, including those about financial matters and treatment options.
When working with clients, there may be, at times, some concerns
about their cognitive or functional abilities to perform life tasks. For
example, clients who are not able to complete activities of daily living
independently may need services to assist them in these areas. The
need to rely on others to assist may limit clients’ independence. An
assessment which can assist social workers in determining assistance
needed in functional life domains is the World Health Organization’s
Disability Assessment Schedule (WHODAS).
When limitations are not physical, but involve mental processes,
there may be some unease about clients’ abilities to provide consent
related to financial, medical, and/or legal treatment. All those over the
age of majority (adults) are presumed to be competent to provide
consent unless legal proceedings have found otherwise. When clients
lack the capacity to provide consent, social workers should protect
clients’ interests by seeking permission from an appropriate third party
and informing clients in a manner consistent with the clients’ level of
understanding. In such instances, social workers should seek to ensure
that the third party acts in a manner consistent with clients’ wishes and
interests. Social workers should take reasonable steps to enhance such
clients’ ability to give informed consent (NASW Code of Ethics—
Informed Consent).
Emancipation and Age of Consent
Treating minors requires social workers to be well versed in state and
federal laws related to consent and confidentiality. The age at which
minors can obtain services without parental/guardian permission varies
by state and the type of service being delivered. Minors also do not have
the same legal rights to confidentiality in some instances because
parents/guardians may have access to minors’ records.
587
Even when parental/guardian consent is needed for treatment, social
workers should provide explanations to minors of all elements required
in a consent procedure, using language that can easily be understood.
Social workers should also seek the minor’s assent or willingness to
participate.
During the problem-solving process, social workers treating minors
must make clear to them all the limits to their self-determination imposed
by legal, financial, and other constraints.
Within our society, minors do not have the same rights as adults.
420
Emancipation is a legal process that ends the rights and
responsibilities of parents or guardians over minor children. However,
there can be either a partial or complete emancipation. Emancipation
involves decision-making authority. Upon achieving emancipation, the
minor assumes the rights, privileges, and duties of adulthood before
actually reaching the “age of majority” (adulthood). An emancipated
minor can enter into a contract, sue others, make health care decisions,
and so on. However, the emancipated minor still has to follow other laws
and still cannot get a driver’s license or drink alcohol prior to the legal
age to do so.
All states have laws dealing with the emancipation of minors; that is,
laws that specify when and under what conditions children can become
independent of their parents or guardians for important legal purposes.
Approximately half of the states regulate emancipation by statutes
specifically designed for that purpose. These statutes set forth the
conditions required or the procedures for seeking emancipation. Statutes
vary considerably from state to state, but most states allow for the
possibility of court-reviewed emancipation. The age at which minors can
apply for or petition for emancipation varies between states.
Under normal circumstances, a minor is presumed to become
emancipated from parents/guardians upon reaching the age of majority.
In most states, the age of majority is 18.
THE INFLUENCE OF THE SOCIAL WORKER’S OWN
VALUES AND BELIEFS ON THE SOCIAL WORKER–
CLIENT/CLIENT SYSTEM RELATIONSHIP
Social workers must recognize values that may inhibit the therapeutic
relationship.
588
1. Universalism—There is one acceptable norm o
standard for everyone versus there are other valid standard
that have been developed by people that they have determined to b
most useful to them.
2. Dichotomous “either-or” thinking; differences ar
inferior, wrong, bad versus differences are just different a
coexist.
3. Heightened ability/value on separating, categorizin
numbering, “left-brain” versus “right-brain” or “whole picture
Mental activity is highly valued to the exclusion of physical an
spiritual experiences. Persons are studied in isolation, not as part
a group or interrelated with their environment.
4. High value on control, constraint, restraint versus value o
flexibility, emotion/feelings, expressiveness, spirituality. What cann
be controlled and definitively defined is deemed nonexisten
unimportant, unscientific, or deviant/inferior. Reality is defined w
the assumption of objectivity; subjective reality is viewed as inva
because it cannot be consistently replicated by many people.
5.
Measure of self comes from outside, and is only in
contrast to others versus value comes from within—you are
worthwhile because you were born, and you strive to live a life
that is in harmony with others and the environment. Worth is
measured by accumulation of wealth or status (outside
measures)—therefore, one can only feel good if one is better
than someone else, or accumulates more than someone else, or
has a higher status.
421
6. Power is defined as “power over” others, mastery ove
environment versus “power through” or in harmony with others;
sharing power, power can be expanded, and each becomes mo
powerful.
THE INFLUENCE OF THE SOCIAL WORKER’S OWN
VALUES AND BELIEFS ON INTERDISCIPLINARY
COLLABORATION
589
Social workers are increasingly recognized as beneficial members of
interdisciplinary teams in addressing the complex needs of clients. A
social worker may be on the team because the social worker is a direct
service provider (counselor, case manager), an administrator, and/or a
consultant.
Interdisciplinary teams can include those from many professions
including law, psychology, and education. When working collaboratively,
social workers can work “hand-in-hand” or “side-by-side” with others. In
the former, social workers and others work together on most issues,
whereas in the latter, each discipline works separately to accomplish
what needs to be done.
Often when working with others, there can be potential conflicts in
both personal and professional values of the team members. In order to
mitigate these conflicts, it is important to:
■ Outline the parameters that will govern the functioning of th
collaborative team, including frequency of contact, other forms
communication, delineation of responsibilities, and leadersh
positions.
■ Understand and define the roles of those who are collaborating.
■ Understand and articulate the professional values of each member.
■ Agree upon methods of decision making.
■ Determine means for resolving disagreements.
The importance of role boundaries, role maintenance, and role clarity
are essential in collaborative relationships. These issues should be
openly discussed among team members, and obstacles to effective
team functioning should be identified and addressed.
In all instances, it is the responsibility of a social worker to
understand and reflect upon personal own values, ensure that they do
not interfere with the collaborative process, and that they are always
aligned with ensuring outcomes in the best interest of a client. Areas of
sensitivity that require self-reflection include beliefs about differing status
among team members, unequal benefits for participation, different levels
of personal and time commitments, insecurity about the value of the
team approach, and/or lack of administrative support.
590
THE IMPACT OF TRANSFERENCE AND
COUNTERTRANSFERENCE IN THE SOCIAL WORKER–
CLIENT/CLIENT SYSTEM RELATIONSHIP
Transference refers to redirection of a client’s feelings for a significant
person to a social worker. Transference was first described by Sigmund
Freud, who acknowledged its importance for a better understanding of a
client’s feelings.
Transference is often manifested as an erotic attraction toward a
422
social worker, but can be seen in many other forms such as rage,
hatred, mistrust, parentification, extreme dependence, or even placing a
social worker in an esteemed status.
When Freud initially encountered transference in his therapy with
clients, he felt it was an obstacle to treatment success. But what he
learned was that the analysis of the transference was actually the work
that needed to be done. The focus in psychoanalysis is, in large part, a
social worker and a client recognizing the transference relationship and
exploring the relationship’s meaning.
Since the transference between a client and a social worker happens
on an unconscious level, a social worker doing psychoanalysis uses
transference to reveal unresolved conflicts a client has with childhood
figures.
Countertransference is defined as redirection of a social worker’s
feelings toward a client, or more generally, as a social worker’s
emotional entanglement with a client. A social worker’s recognition of
countertransference is nearly as critical as understanding a client’s
transference. Not only does this help a social worker regulate emotions
in the therapeutic relationship, but it also gives a social worker valuable
insight into what a client is attempting to elicit.
For example, a social worker who is sexually attracted to a client
must understand this as countertransference, and look at how a client
may be eliciting this reaction. Once it has been identified, a social worker
can ask a client about the client’s feelings toward a social worker, and/or
explore how they relate to unconscious motivations, desires, or fears.
THE IMPACT OF TRANSFERENCE AND
COUNTERTRANSFERENCE WITHIN SUPERVISORY
RELATIONSHIPS
591
Transference and countertransference within supervisory relationships
can be a parallel process of what is occurring between a social worker
and a client. The transference occurs when a social worker recreates,
within a supervisory relationship, a presenting problem and emotions
occurring in a therapeutic relationship. Countertransference occurs when
a supervisor responds to a social worker in the same manner that a
social worker responds to a client. Thus, a supervisory interaction
replays, or is parallel with, a social worker– client interaction. In essence,
the processes at work in the relationship between a social worker and a
client are reflected in the relationship between a social worker and the
supervisor’s supervisor.
Parallel process is an unconscious identification with a client and can
be used as an important part of the supervisory process. Examining it
will assist a social worker and the social worker’s supervisor in
identifying issues that exist in a therapeutic relationship and allow for
techniques to resolve these issues to be identified and discussed.
THE COMPONENTS OF A SAFE AND POSITIVE WORK
ENVIRONMENT
To practice effectively and ethically, social workers need a working
environment that upholds ethical practice and is committed to standards
and good quality services. A positive working environment is created
where the values and principles of employers and social workers are
consistent with each other and mutually reinforcing. There is substantial
evidence that the most effective social work services are provided in
423
situations where employers understand social work practice, respect
their employees, and are committed to implementing professional
values.
A framework for supporting good practice needs to take account of
ethical principles and ensure effective induction, supervision, workload
management, and continuing professional development.
The following are some elements which enable social workers to
practice ethically:
■ Written policies setting out standards of ethical practice provide clar
and protection for clients, social workers, and agencies. Soc
workers should never be required to do anything that would put at ri
592
their ability to uphold such ethical standards, including policies o
confidentiality, equal opportunities, and risk management.
■ Quality social work services draw on research and practice evidenc
Policies should be informed by research and practice evidence.
■ The public, including clients, should be regularly informed about thes
standards, policies, and procedures and provided with informatio
about how to raise concerns or make complaints about standards
practice.
■ People employed as social workers must be suitable to enter th
workforce, hold appropriate recognized qualifications that entitle the
to practice as social workers, provide references (including eviden
that they are not a risk to clients), and demonstrate that th
understand their roles and responsibilities, including their ethic
duties.
■ Dangerous, discriminatory, or exploitative behavior and practice mu
be dealt with promptly through the implementation of policies a
procedures. Such policies should provide measures to prevent an
minimize violence, making it clear to staff, social workers, and clien
that violence, threats, or abusive behavior is not acceptable.
■ Social workers have a right for their health and occupational safety
be protected. Social workers frequently experience trauma or violenc
in their work and they are vulnerable to work-related stress an
burnout due to the nature of their work.
■ The adoption and implementation of policies on workloa
management make a major contribution to the provision of qual
services to clients. Workload practices must consider the basic tene
of social work intervention, including the centrality of huma
relationships, the need to manage risk and complexity, and the duty
highlight unmet need.
■ The physical working environment has an important part to play in t
support of effective and ethical practice including, for example, th
physical arrangements and procedures required for confident
interviewing and storage of confidential records.
■
Continuing professional development and further training enable
social workers to strengthen and develop their skills and
593
knowledge and ensure that agencies adapt to the changing needs
of clients and changing organizational realities. Orientation and
induction training provided to new employees and those changing
jobs are essential, including the management of risk, making
complex professional judgments, and the fulfillment of statutory
obligations such as the protection of minors and vulnerable adults.
424
■ Good quality, regular social work supervision by people who have th
necessary experience and qualifications in social work practice is a
essential tool to ensure accountable and ethical practice. Resear
has confirmed that supervision is an important vehicle for supportin
the management function in promoting creative and reflectiv
practice, supporting staff resilience and well-being, and continuo
professional development.
■ Systematic reviews of services and practice, led by social worke
who have experience of the field, should be held regularly. The
activities identify needed support, training, and action when poor
unethical practice is identified.
■ Career development opportunities for social workers wishing
develop advanced practice skills need to be available. These not on
meet the individual needs of social workers, but can also constitute a
effective tool for retaining valuable practice knowledge an
experience and for preventing high staff turnover and difficulties
recruitment that are typical challenges constantly being faced
social work services.
■ Rates of pay or fees for social work practice need to be comparab
with similar professionals and recognize the skill and qualifications
social workers.
SOCIAL WORKER SELF-CARE PRINCIPLES AND
TECHNIQUES
Self-care is essential for social workers so that they can practice
effectively and honor their professional and personal commitments. Self-
care refers to activities and practices that are done on a regular basis to
reduce stress and maintain and enhance short- and longer-term health
and well-being.
594
Practicing self-care helps social workers:
■ Identify and manage the general challenges that har
working professionals face such as the potential for stress an
burnout or interpersonal difficulties.
■ Become aware of personal vulnerabilities such as th
potential for retraumatization (if trauma history exists), vicarious
secondary traumatization (if working with individuals who report the
own traumatic experiences), and compassion fatigue (which can
developed from a combination of burnout and vicario
traumatization).
■ Achieve balance in life by maintaining and enhancing t
attention paid to different domains of life in a way that meets person
needs.
Self-care is not simply about limiting or addressing professional
stressors. It is also about enhancing overall well-being. There are
common aims to almost all self-care efforts including:
■ Taking care of physical and psychological health
■ Managing and reducing stress
■ Honoring emotional and spiritual needs
■ Fostering and sustaining relationships
■ Achieving an equilibrium between meeting personal needs a
school/work demands
BURNOUT, SECONDARY TRAUMA, AND COMPASSION
425
FATIGUE
Burnout, secondary trauma, and compassion fatigue have been used
interchangeably to express adverse impacts that result from constantly
working with those who are experiencing problems or trauma or are in
crisis.
595
Burnout is a state of physical, emotional, psychological, and/or
spiritual exhaustion. It can be manifested by cynicism or a lack of
satisfaction in working with clients to resolve their problems. Burnout is
characterized by emotional fatigue and feeling inadequate due to not
being able to change clients’ life circumstances. Many factors can
contribute to burnout, including client, organizational, and/or contextual
variables.
Secondary trauma relates to the behaviors and emotions that result
from knowledge about traumatizing events experienced by clients and
the stress resulting from helping or wanting to help them. Secondary
trauma results from engaging in empathic relationships with clients who
have had traumatic experiences and witnessing the effects of those
experiences. The symptoms of secondary trauma mirror those
experienced by the primary victim of trauma, including, but not limited to,
insomnia, chronic irritability or angry outbursts, fatigue, difficulty
concentrating, and/or avoidance.
Compassion fatigue is best defined as a syndrome consisting of a
combination of the symptoms of secondary trauma and burnout. It
usually represents the overall experience of emotional and physical
fatigue that social workers can experience due to the prevalent use of
empathy when treating clients who are distraught and experiencing
emotional pain. Social workers also encounter bureaucratic hurdles that
exacerbate agency stress and upset the balance between practice and
administrative demands. Much like burnout, compassion fatigue tends to
occur cumulatively over time, whereas secondary trauma may have a
more immediate onset. Social workers may develop empathy or
compassion fatigue as they repeatedly see little or no improvement in
client situations. Social workers who treat victims of trauma can find that
secondary trauma may contribute to overall compassion fatigue.
However, social workers who do not treat those who have experienced
trauma may experience compassion fatigue without experiencing
secondary trauma.
In order to manage the effects of burnout and secondary trauma, and
in an attempt to prevent compassion fatigue, social workers must
engage in self-care activities which should include, but not be limited to,
receiving support from mentors or peers, obtaining therapy, engaging in
relaxation and personal endeavors that are nonprofessional activities,
and balancing work demands with one’s personal life.
596
EVIDENCE-BASED PRACTICE
Evidence-based social work practice combines research knowledge,
professional/clinical expertise, social work values, and client
preferences/circumstances. It is a dynamic and fluid process whereby
social workers seek, interpret, use, and evaluate the best available
information in an effort to make the best practice decisions.
The promotion of evidence-based research within social work is
widespread. Evidence-based research gathers evidence that may be
informative for clinical practice or clinical decision making. It also
involves the process of gathering and synthesizing scientific evidence
from various sources and translating it to be applied to practice.
The use of evidence-based practice places the well-being of clients
426
at the forefront, desiring to discover and use the best practices
available. The use of evidence-based practice requires social workers to
only use services and techniques that were found effective by rigorous,
scientific, empirical studies—that is, outcome research.
Social workers must be willing and able to locate and use evidence-
based interventions. In areas in which evidence-based interventions are
not available, social workers must still use research to guide practice.
Applying knowledge gleaned from research findings will assist social
workers in providing services informed by scientific investigation and
lead to new interventions that can be evaluated as evidence-based
practices.
Decisions are based on the use of many sources, ranging from
systematic reviews and meta-analyses to less rigorous research
designs.
Social workers often use “evidence-based practice” to refer to
programs that have a proven track record. However, it takes a long time
for a program or intervention to be “evidence based.” Thus, most
interventions in social work need more empirically supported research in
order to accurately apply the term. “Evidence-informed practice” may be
more appropriate.
Some questions guide the selection of intervention modalities:
■ How will the recommended modality assist with the achievement
the treatment goal and will it help get the outcomes desired?
■ How does the recommended treatment modality promote clie
597
strengths, capabilities, and interests?
■ What are the risks and benefits associated with the recommende
modality?
■ Is there research or evidence to support the use of this modality f
this target problem?
■ Is this modality appropriate and tested on those with the same
similar cultural background as the client?
■ What training and experience does a social worker have with th
recommended modality?
■ Is the recommended modality evidence-based or consistent w
available research? If not, why?
■ Was the recommended modality discussed with and selected by
client?
■ Will the use of the recommended modality be assessed periodicall
When? How?
■ Is the recommended treatment modality covered by insurance? Wh
is the cost? How does it compare to the use of other options?
PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT ACTIVITIES TO IMPROVE
PRACTICE AND MAINTAIN CURRENT PROFESSIONAL
KNOWLEDGE (E.G., IN-SERVICE TRAINING, LICENSING
REQUIREMENTS, REVIEWS OF LITERATURE,
WORKSHOPS)
Professions enjoy a high social status, regard, and esteem conferred
upon them by society. This high esteem arises primarily from the higher
social function of their work, which is regarded as vital to society as a
427
whole and, thus, special and valuable in nature. All professions
involve technical, specialized, and highly skilled work, often referred to
as “professional expertise.” Training for this work involves obtaining
degrees and professional qualifications (i.e., licensure) without which
entry to the profession is barred. Training also requires regular updating
of skills through continuing education.
598
Professional development refers to skills and knowledge attained for
effective service delivery and career advancement. Professional
development encompasses all types of learning opportunities, ranging
from formal coursework and conferences to informal learning
opportunities situated in practice. There are a variety of approaches to
professional development, including consultation, coaching,
communities of practice, mentoring, reflective supervision, and technical
assistance.
Social workers often go through various stages of professional
development, including:
1. Orientation and job induction
2. Autonomous worker
3. Member of a service team (independence to interdependence)
4. Development of specialization
5.
Preparation to be a mentor or supervisor
428
Content Area IV: Practice Questions
429
The following section has 32 unique practice questions that assess
retention of material related to professional values and ethics. The
number of questions reflects the approximate proportion of a typical
exam (19%) devoted to this content.
1. A social worker receives a call from a former girlfriend who is
now married and is having trouble dealing with the recent death
of her mother. The former girlfriend would like to see the social
worker for counseling. The social worker has not seen the
former girlfriend in more than 10 years. In order to handle this
situation appropriately, the social worker should:
A. Begin treatment immediately as more than a decade has
passed since the relationship
B. Contact the social work licensing board to determine if
regulation allows this treatment
599
C. Inform the former girlfriend that the social worker cannot
treat her
2. For which of the following reasons are social workers allowed to
terminate services?
A. Social workers wish to pursue social relationships with
clients
B. Social workers are leaving employment settings to pursue
other opportunities
C. Social workers believe that clients are making poor choices
that negatively affect their well-being
3. A social worker in private practice is providing therapy to a client.
The client has not paid the social worker for many weeks,
accumulating a substantial balance, despite receiving and
acknowledging the social worker’s payment policy. The social
worker has told the client repeatedly that he will be terminated if
he does not pay his bill and decides to do so at the next session.
The client comes into this session visibly upset and crying
because he doesn’t think “he can go on” without the social
worker. The social worker tells the client that he can come back
to see her once the balance is paid. Which BEST describes the
actions of the social worker?
A. Unethical because the client may be a danger to himself
B. Ethical because the social worker is allowing the client to
return when the balance is paid
C. Unethical because termination is not allowed based upon
nonpayment of services
4
431
.
A school social worker is employed part-time in a mental health
agency. A mother brings her daughter into the agency and asks
that the social worker provide counseling because she has been
impressed by the social worker’s ability to “relate to” her
daughter in school. The school social worker has taken the lead
600
in developing her daughter’s Individual Education Plan (IEP)
and meets with the daughter regularly in school to assess her
progress. In this situation, the social worker should:
A. Refuse to serve the daughter in the mental health agency
as this situation represents a conflict
B. Serve the daughter in both settings to ensure continuity of
treatment outside of the school setting
C. Agree to be a consultant as needed while referring the
daughter to another professional
5. A social worker has joined the board of directors of a domestic
violence agency where she was formerly a volunteer. Which of
the following activities can the social worker engage in ethically?
A. Raising money for the agency through direct solicitation
B. Serving agency clients at a reduced rate in her private
practice
C. Working part-time at the agency if needed due to staff
shortages
6. A social worker asks her current clients to write testimonial
endorsements to assist with attracting others to her private
practice. Which BEST describes these requests by the social
worker?
A. Ethical because clients can decide whether they will write
them
B. Ethical if she agrees not to identify clients by name
C. Unethical because clients are vulnerable due to their
circumstances
7. A social worker believes that there may be an ethical dilemma in
his agency. According to steps in ethical problem solving, the
social worker should FIRST consult:
A. A supervisor
B. The professional ethical code
601
C. The policies and procedures of the agency
8. Therapy sessions conducted by social workers in an agency are
frequently audiotaped for review by their supervisors. These
tapes are destroyed upon client terminations and are used only
for supervisory purposes, not shared with others outside the
agency. The standard consent form used by the agency states
that social workers will receive supervision and client information
may be disclosed with supervisors to ensure service quality. To
avoid making clients feel uncomfortable, taping is not discussed
with them, but consent forms are read by the social worker to
clients who sign them. Which of the following statements BEST
describes this situation?
A. Ethical because it is done as part of supervision to ensure
service quality
B. Unethical because informed consent for audiotaping has not
been obtained
C. Ethical because the tapes are destroyed upon termination
9
433
.
A social worker finds that she has a lot in common with a client.
The client suggests seeing another professional because the
client feels she “would be a better friend than client.” The social
worker agrees, but states that she cannot have contact with the
client for several months after termination to allow time for her to
get engaged in treatment with a new social worker. Which
BEST describes the actions of the social worker?
A. Ethical because contact will not occur until several months
after ending of the therapeutic relationship
B. Ethical because the social worker is respecting the client’s
self-determination
C. Unethical because the social worker cannot terminate
services for this reason
10. After several months of treating a client, a social worker learns
602
that the client goes to the same church as the social worker.
The social worker continues to go to the church, seeing the
client occasionally across the room. The social worker has no
contact with the client at church. Which BEST describes the
actions of the social worker?
A. Unethical because a referral should have been made to
another social worker
B. Ethical because the conflict was not known initially and has
been minimized by avoiding contact
C. Unethical because the social worker should have started
attending another church
11. A social worker regularly refers clients to a colleague because
he has expertise in treating substance-related and addictive
disorders. The colleague is very appreciative of the social
worker’s confidence in his abilities and offers his season
football tickets to the social worker each time a referral is
received. The social worker takes the tickets so as not to “hurt
his feelings,” but donates them to a local charity. Which BEST
describes the actions of the social worker?
A. Ethical because the tickets are donated to charity
B. Unethical because the social worker should not accept the
tickets
C. Ethical because there is no additional cost to the colleague
for the tickets
12. An agency is required by its funder to make extensive
modifications to its human resource policies. The agency
director is worried about the financial health of the agency and
reports that the agency does not have the money to hire
someone to complete this task. The social worker’s wife is a
human resource manager at a large corporation and agrees to
work with the agency for a few weeks at a deeply discounted
rate to meet the requirements. Which of the following BEST
describes this situation?
603
A. Ethical because the wife is being hired as a consultant and
not an employee of the agency
B. Unethical because it represents a conflict of interest
C. Unethical because the wife is charging for her services
1
435
3
.
A social worker in a substance abuse treatment facility is
attracted to one of her supervisees and asks him out on a date.
After several months of dating, they get married and the
supervisee finds a job at another agency. Which BEST
describes the actions of the social worker?
A. Unethical because she engaged in a dual relationship with a
supervisee
B. Ethical because the supervisee found another job once they
were married
C. Ethical because the sexual contact prohibition only applies
to social workers and clients
14. A client in treatment with a social worker has made substantial
progress. She loses her job and no longer has insurance that
will pay for services. Both the social worker and the client think
that continued treatment would be beneficial. In order to assist
the client in an ethical manner, the social worker should:
A. Terminate services until she is reemployed and has
insurance coverage
B. Identify services that can be performed by the client in
exchange for treatment
C. Arrange to see the client on a sliding scale or pro bono until
she is reemployed
15. Which of the following actions by a social worker is considered
ethical according to established practice standards?
A. Writing a recommendation for a current adult client
604
B. Giving a monetary gift to a current adult client
C. Having a business relationship with a current adult client
16. Which of the following statements is accurate about assent and
consent in social work practice?
A. Assent and consent both give legal authorization to
participate in treatment
B. Assent and consent procedures are similar, each requiring
clients to be informed about risks
C. Assent and consent are required of all clients, even those
who are court mandated
1
437
7
.
A couple is receiving marriage counseling from a social worker.
After several months, the couple decides to end their marriage
and ask the social worker to make a child custody
recommendation to the court because they feel that the social
worker is best suited to make suggestions. The social worker
should:
A. Decline because it is not appropriate since they are both
current counseling clients
B. Accept because both clients agree that the social worker is
appropriate to make recommendation
C. Decline until the social worker is contacted by the court
directly
18. Which of the following statements is accurate regarding
physical contact between social workers and clients?
A. Contact should be culturally sensitive, considering the
customs, beliefs, and traditions of clients
B. Contact should only occur with adult clients and not children
C. Contact should only occur after rules for such contact have
been established
605
19. A client abruptly stopped coming to sessions with a social
worker after 6 weeks. About a month later, the client calls the
social worker and asks for a copy of his record. There is
nothing in the record that is harmful to the client, but the social
worker refuses to give the copy to the client. Which BEST
describes the actions of the social worker?
A. Ethical because he did not terminate with the social worker
appropriately
B. Ethical because the request must come in writing with the
reason that a copy is needed
C. Unethical because the social worker has a duty to give the
client a copy of the record
439
20.
When a social worker has direct knowledge of a social
work colleague’s impairment that interferes with effective
practice, the social worker should FIRST:
A. Consult with the colleague when feasible to take remedial
action
B. Notify the agency director so that employee assistance
services can be accessed
C. Report the situation to the social work licensing board
21. A social worker suspects that a child receiving services from
her agency is being psychologically abused and neglected.
She discusses the reasons for her belief and her serious
concerns about the child’s home environment with her social
work supervisor. After a lengthy conversation, the social work
supervisor does not agree with the social worker and tells the
social worker to monitor the situation for a while before
deciding whether to make a report to the child protection
agency. In order to handle the situation in an ethical manner,
the social worker should:
A. Regularly follow up with the supervisor to seek direction
B. Contact the child protection agency immediately
C. Make another appointment to speak to the agency director
606
22. A social worker is providing therapy to a family. During a
session, the 17-year-old daughter states that her father
molested her when she was 6 years old. She says that the
molestation happened twice and has not occurred since that
time. The father confirms the daughter’s account and says that
he is remorseful about his actions. In this situation, the social
worker should:
A. Ask the daughter about what should happen to the father
due to his actions
B. Make a note in the file, but not contact the child protection
agency given the time that has passed
C. Contact the child protection agency after telling the family of
the need to do so
23. What are a social worker’s ethical obligations for record
release when sued by a client for malpractice?
A. A social worker should never release any information about
treatment
B. A social worker should claim privilege so the courts
understand that the information is confidential
C. A social worker should release only information related to
the nature of the lawsuit
441
24.
Which of the following actions constitute an unethical use
of identifying client data?
A. Incorporating data in a grant application for emergency
funding due to budget cuts
B. Notifying child protective services of suspected neglect
C. Seeking assistance from a supervisor or consultant
concerning critical treatment issues
25. A social worker is completing an intake with a family who
recently immigrated from another country. They need help with
basic needs such as rental and nutrition assistance. The
children appear neat and clean. The social worker observes
607
the mother mixing a small amount of alcohol into her infant’s
bottle and is told that this “soothes” the child as she is teething.
During the intake, the family discloses that they do not believe
in Western medicine and think sickness is caused by the
presence of evil demons. They report that they spend much of
their day engaged in prayer and meditation because one of
their children is gravely ill. In order to BEST assist this family,
the social worker should:
A. Prioritize them for services provided by the agency
B. Respect their cultural traditions while working with them to
meet their basic needs
C. Inform them that a report to the child protection agency is
necessary
26. A social worker receives a request from a client’s insurance
company for detailed treatment summaries. The
correspondence makes clear that the insurance company will
cease funding for treatment unless these summaries are
received immediately. In order to best assist, the social worker
should:
A. Contact the client to see if this information can be released
B. Provide only the diagnosis and prognosis, citing
confidentiality mandates
C. Send the treatment summaries as soon as possible
27. A social worker is providing therapy to a mother and her 6-
year-old child. They have made substantial progress and the
social worker is seeing dramatic improvements in their
relationship. During a session, the social worker observes what
appear to be burns on the child’s neck and arm. She asks the
mother about what caused these injuries and the mother’s
explanation does not seem plausible. The social worker is
concerned and feels that physical abuse may have occurred. In
order to BEST address this situation, the social worker should:
A. Express her concerns to the mother and ask the mother to
come back with the child in a few days so that the social
608
worker can assess the situation
B. Wait until the mother and child leave the office and contact
the child protection agency
C. Tell the mother that the social worker will need to contact
the child protection agency immediately and involve her in
making the report
443
28.
A social worker receives a subpoena for a former client’s
record. The social worker should FIRST:
A. Respond to the court by claiming privilege
B. Provide the record since the request relates to a former
client
C. Inform the court that the client is no longer receiving
services
29. A school social worker is seeing a 14-year-old girl who
confides that she is struggling with gender identity issues and
is being teased by peers. Several weeks later, the principal
asks the social worker what is “going on” with her client
because she was involved in an altercation with other students.
The principal asks to see her file to better understand her
issues because she is facing out-of-school suspension for her
behavior. The principal thinks that the information contained in
the file will help reduce her punishment. In this situation, the
social worker should:
A. Share the file with the principal to assist the client with
avoiding punishment
B. Summarize the client’s struggles in a conversation with the
principal
C. Inform the principal that the information is confidential
30. A social worker is contacted by a man who is very distraught.
He is aware that his mother was a client of the social worker
because he has found bills for services in her belongings after
she recently passed away. He had little contact with her in the
last years of her life as she seemed “to pull away.” He is trying
609
to understand her behavior and would like to make an
appointment to see the social worker. The social worker
should:
A. Schedule a session with the son to try to assist him in
understanding his mother’s behavior
B. Explain to the son that the social worker cannot talk to him
about his mother
C. Ask him to put his questions in writing so the social worker
can determine their nature
31. Which of the following is a core value in the social work
profession as stated in the preamble of the professional ethical
code?
A. Reliability
B. Loyalty
C. Service
32. Which of the following is accurate about transference in social
work practice?
A. Transference is more likely with clients with certain
personality features
B. Transference does not have any therapeutic value
C. Transference is always sexual in nature
1
430
.
C. Social workers should not provide clinical services to individuals
with whom they have had prior intimate relationships. Providing
clinical services to a former girlfriend has the potential to be
harmful to her and the past relationship may be difficult for the
social worker and the former girlfriend to maintain appropriate
professional boundaries.
Question Assesses
610
Content Area IV—Professional Values and Ethics; Professional
Values and Ethical Issues (Competency); Professional Boundaries
in the Social Worker–Client/Client System Relationship (e.g.,
Power Differences, Conflicts of Interest, etc.) (KSA)
2. B. Social workers should not terminate services to pursue social,
financial, or sexual relationships with clients or when they believe that
clients are making poor choices. Social workers who are leaving
employment settings can terminate with clients after informing them
of appropriate options for the continuation of services and the
benefits and risk of the options.
Question Assesses
Content Area IV—Professional Values and Ethics; Professional
Values and Ethical Issues (Competency); Legal and/or Ethical
Issues Related to Termination (KSA)
3. A. Social workers in fee-for-service settings may terminate services
to clients who are not paying overdue balances if the financia
contractual arrangements have been made clear to clients, if clients
do not pose an imminent danger to self or others, and if the clinica
and other consequences of the current nonpayment have been
addressed and discussed. The client appears upset and states that
he cannot “go on.” Such a statement may be an indication of suicide
risk. The social worker must assess this risk and provide appropriate
supports/referrals prior to termination.
Question Assesses
Content Area IV—Professional Values and Ethics; Professional
Values and Ethical Issues (Competency); Legal and/or Ethical
Issues Related to Termination (KSA)
4
432
.
A. The NASW Code of Ethics states that social workers should
take appropriate action to minimize any conflict of interest. An
agreement for the social worker to be a consultant from the onset is
611
also a conflict because the school social worker will then be serving
her in different roles in both settings.
Question Assesses
Content Area IV—Professional Values and Ethics; Professional
Values and Ethical Issues (Competency); Ethical Issues Related to
Dual Relationships (KSA)
5. A. Raising money is routinely expected of board members of human
service organizations. The social worker cannot provide services to
agency clients in her private practice as this arrangement is a conflict
of interest. Additionally, the social worker should not work at an
agency in which she is on the board of directors. These dual roles in
the organization also serve as a conflict.
Question Assesses
Content Area IV—Professional Values and Ethics; Professional
Values and Ethical Issues (Competency); Ethical Issues Related to
Dual Relationships (KSA)
6. C. Social workers should not engage in solicitation of testimonia
endorsements (including solicitation of consent to use a client’s prior
statement as a testimonial endorsement) from current clients or from
other people who, because of their particular circumstances, are
vulnerable to undue influence.
Question Assesses
Content Area IV—Professional Values and Ethics; Professional
Values and Ethical Issues (Competency); Professional Boundaries
in the Social Worker–Client/Client System Relationship (e.g.,
Power Differences, Conflicts of Interest, etc.) (KSA)
7. B. The first step in ethical problem solving is to identify ethica
standards, as defined by the professional NASW Code of Ethics,
which may be compromised. The social worker should not rely on his
supervisor to determine whether there is an ethical issue or dilemma.
The supervisor may not even be a social worker. By referring directly
612
to the NASW Code of Ethics, the social worker can better weigh
ethical issues in light of key social work values and principles, which
are explicitly stated in this document.
Question Assesses
Content Area IV—Professional Values and Ethics; Professional
Values and Ethical Issues (Competency); Techniques to Identify
and Resolve Ethical Dilemmas (KSA)
8. B. Social workers should obtain clients’ informed consent before
audio or video recording clients or permitting observation of services
to clients by a third party. The consent forms should explicitly state
that the sessions will be audiotaped and have information about who
will listen to the recordings, how they will be stored, what will happen
to the tapes after treatment has ended, and so forth. The risks and
benefits associated with audio or video recording should also be
reviewed with clients to get their informed consent. The permission of
the client to make these recordings cannot be assumed or taken for
granted as part of standard language about supervision on a consent
form.
Question Assesses
Content Area IV—Professional Values and Ethics; Professional
Values and Ethical Issues (Competency); The Principles and
Processes of Obtaining Informed Consent (KSA)
434
9.
C. Social workers should not terminate services to pursue a
social, financial, or sexual relationship with a client.
Question Assesses
Content Area IV—Professional Values and Ethics; Professional
Values and Ethical Issues (Competency); Ethical Issues Related to
Dual Relationships (KSA)
10. B. The social worker was not aware of this potential conflict of
interest upon the start of treatment. Once it was discovered, steps,
such as minimizing contact and sitting across the room, were taken
613
to mitigate its existence. The client does not have to be referred to
another social worker unless it is more comfortable for the client to
do so. In addition, the social worker does not have to leave the
church. However, the existence of this unanticipated conflict should
be discussed so that the client is aware of its existence and
strategies for minimizing its impact can be established.
Question Assesses
Content Area IV—Professional Values and Ethics; Professional
Values and Ethical Issues (Competency); Ethical Issues Related to
Dual Relationships (KSA)
11. B. Because the receipt of the tickets by the social worker is clearly
linked to the referrals, this is a form of “fee splitting,” which is not
allowed in social work practice. Social workers cannot receive
incentives or remuneration for making referrals. The donation of the
tickets to a local charity does not justify acceptance of these gifts.
Although there is no additional cost to the colleague, the footbal
tickets clearly have monetary value.
Question Assesses
Content Area IV—Professional Values and Ethics; Professional
Values and Ethical Issues (Competency); Ethical Issues Related to
Dual Relationships (KSA)
12. B. The NASW Code of Ethics indicates that consultation should
follow all ethical standards, including avoiding conflicts of interest
and maintaining boundaries. The social worker’s wife making
changes to the agency’s personnel policies that impact her husband
is clearly a conflict of interest. Breaching this standard should not
be justified because the situation appears desperate and other
resources are not evident. It remains a conflict of interest whether
the wife charges for her services or not.
Question Assesses
Content Area IV—Professional Values and Ethics; Professional
Values and Ethical Issues (Competency); Ethical Issues Related to
614
Dual Relationships (KSA)
1
436
3
.
A. The NASW Code of Ethics prohibits social workers who function
as supervisors or educators from engaging in sexual activities or
contact (including verbal, written, electronic, or physical contact)
with supervisees, students, trainees, or other colleagues over who
they exercise professional authority.
The social worker engaged in a dual relationship with her
supervisee, which is unethical.
Question Assesses
Content Area IV—Professional Values and Ethics; Professional
Values and Ethical Issues (Competency); Ethical Issues Related to
Dual Relationships (KSA)
14. C. Social workers are only allowed to barter under very limited
circumstances. The content in this vignette does not justify the use
of bartering or exchanging services for treatment. Terminating
services also does not assist the client. The response choice that
assists “the client in an ethical manner” is the one that arranges to
see the client for a sliding scale or pro bono.
Question Assesses
Content Area IV—Professional Values and Ethics; Professional
Values and Ethical Issues (Competency); Legal and/or Ethical
Issues Related to the Practice of Social Work, Including
Responsibility to Clients/Client Systems, Colleagues, the
Profession, and Society (KSA)
15. A. Social workers should not give money to or have a dua
(business) relationship with clients according to the NASW Code of
Ethics. Social workers can certainly write a recommendation for a
current (or even former) client as long as the content is based on
information collected as part of service delivery and social workers
615
are not making assertions or drawing conclusions beyond the scope
of therapeutic relationships.
Question Assesses
Content Area IV—Professional Values and Ethics; Professional
Values and Ethical Issues (Competency); Legal and/or Ethical
Issues Related to the Practice of Social Work, Including
Responsibility to Clients/Client Systems, Colleagues, the
Profession, and Society (KSA)
16. B. Assent and consent are not the same. Consent is the agreement
of clients or their authorized representatives, who have lega
authority to make decisions for them, to participate in treatment
Assent is a term used to express willingness to participate in
treatment by clients who are too young to give consent or have
been deemed by the courts as incapable of making legal decisions
Assent by itself is not sufficient. If assent is given, social workers
must still obtain consent from clients’ parents or guardians. Court-
mandated services do not require clients’ consent, but clients
should be advised at the onset what they have control over and
what they do not in these situations. Both assent and consent
require informing clients of the risks and benefits of services to be
received.
Question Assesses
Content Area IV—Professional Values and Ethics; Professional
Values and Ethical Issues (Competency); The Principles and
Processes of Obtaining Informed Consent (KSA)
1
438
7
.
A. The process and goals for completion of a child custody
evaluation are vastly different than those used in marriage
counseling. Making child custody recommendations would be
inappropriate because both parties were not informed from the
onset that discussions and information collected would be used for
this purpose. In addition, both parties are current counseling
616
clients. Often child custody evaluation recommendations are not
favorable and/or acceptable to both parents. Providing such a
recommendation may, therefore, not be in the best interest or
promote positive well-being for one or both of the parties.
Question Assesses
Content Area IV—Professional Values and Ethics; Professional
Values and Ethical Issues (Competency); Ethical Issues Related to
Dual Relationships (KSA)
18. A. The standards that govern social work practice address the use
of physical contact with clients. Social workers should not engage in
physical contact with clients when there is a possibility of
psychological harm as a result of the contact (such as cradling or
caressing clients). Physical contact or other activities of a sexua
nature with clients are clearly not allowed by social workers.
The NASW Code of Ethics does not limit physical contact to only
adult clients. However, social workers must clearly evaluate the
appropriateness of having physical contact with children, especially
because many of the youth served have experienced trauma.
There do not need to be “rules” established to govern physical
contact though setting clear, appropriate, and culturally sensitive
“boundaries” that govern physical contact are essential for
professional practice.
Question Assesses
Content Area IV—Professional Values and Ethics; Professional
Values and Ethical Issues (Competency); Professional Boundaries
in the Social Worker–Client/Client System Relationship (e.g.,
Power Differences, Conflicts of Interest, etc.) (KSA)
19. C. Social workers should provide clients with reasonable access to
their records. Social workers who are concerned that clients’ access
to their records could cause serious misunderstanding or harm to a
client should provide assistance in interpreting the records and
consultation with a client regarding the records. Social workers
should limit clients’ access to their records, or portions of their
617
records, only in exceptional circumstances when there is compelling
evidence that such access would cause serious harm to a client.
There was not a risk of harm due to the release, so the socia
worker should have provided access; however, information can be
withheld in some circumstances, as described, as long as the
request and the reason for the denial is documented in the client’s
file.
Question Assesses
Content Area IV—Professional Values and Ethics; Confidentiality
(Competency); The Use of Client/Client System Records (KSA)
2
440
0
.
A. The NASW Code of Ethics states social workers who have
direct knowledge of colleague impairment that is due to personal
problems, psychosocial distress, substance abuse, or mental
health difficulties that interfere with practice effectiveness should
consult with the colleague when feasible and assist the colleague
in taking remedial action. Going to the agency director may be
appropriate, but only after the social worker has gone to the
colleague FIRST. Reporting the issue to the social work licensing
board would also not be the initial response as the social work
colleague needs to take action to avoid treating clients until the
issues are resolved. Licensing board actions often take
considerable time to implement.
Question Assesses
Content Area IV—Professional Values and Ethics; Confidentiality
(Competency); Legal and/or Ethical Issues Regarding Mandatory
Reporting (e.g., Abuse, Threat of Harm, Impaired Professionals,
etc.) (KSA)
21. B. Social workers are mandated reporters. Despite the supervisor’s
assessment not reaching the same conclusion, the social worker
still must make a report because she has “a reasonable suspicion.”
618
It would not be appropriate to delay to meet with the supervisor or
agency director.
Question Assesses
Content Area IV—Professional Values and Ethics; Confidentiality
(Competency); Legal and/or Ethical Issues Regarding Mandatory
Reporting (e.g., Abuse, Threat of Harm, Impaired Professionals,
etc.) (KSA)
22. C. Social workers are mandated reporters. In this instance, the
social worker should not be making an assessment about these
being isolated incidents or the likelihood that they would happen
again. The NASW Code of Ethics states that clients should be
informed whenever possible of such reports. The social worker’s
behavior should not solely be dictated by what the daughter wants
as the father may be continuing to engage in inappropriate acts with
children.
Question Assesses
Content Area IV—Professional Values and Ethics; Confidentiality
(Competency); Legal and/or Ethical Issues Regarding Mandatory
Reporting (e.g., Abuse, Threat of Harm, Impaired Professionals,
etc.) (KSA)
23. C. Social workers are allowed to defend themselves when sued by
clients. Such a defense usually involves releasing information
related to treatment. However, social workers should limit the
information released to that which is relevant to the allegations in
the lawsuit.
Question Assesses
Content Area IV—Professional Values and Ethics; Confidentiality
(Competency); Legal and/or Ethical Issues Regarding
Confidentiality, Including Electronic Information Security (KSA)
619
2
442
4
.
A. Releasing information is mandated for child abuse and neglect
protections. A social worker should inform the client when seeking
supervision and/or consultation and get the client’s permission to
release information. However, in instances in which disclosure is
needed to prevent serious, foreseeable, and imminent harm to a
client, the social worker can release only the minimum amount of
information necessary to prevent such harm. A social worker
should never use identifying client data in a grant application, and
to do so is unethical because it is not directly tied to client safety.
Question Assesses
Content Area IV—Professional Values and Ethics; Confidentiality
(Competency); Legal and/or Ethical Issues Regarding
Confidentiality, Including Electronic Information Security (KSA)
25. C. Although the beliefs and behaviors of the family may be
culturally based, there may be some adverse impacts to the
children that threaten their well-being. It is not the responsibility of
the social worker to determine the reasons for or impact of their
actions. The social worker should get the child protection agency
involved so they can investigate the situation further. There also
may be some resources available to this family by the child
protection agency.
Question Assesses
Content Area IV—Professional Values and Ethics; Confidentiality
(Competency); Legal and/or Ethical Issues Regarding Mandatory
Reporting (e.g., Abuse, Threat of Harm, Impaired Professionals,
etc.) (KSA)
26. A. Social workers should not disclose confidential information to
third-party payers, including insurance companies, unless clients
have authorized such disclosures. The request must be discussed
with the client. Additionally, best practice includes reviewing the
620
summaries with the client prior to submission even if permission is
granted to release them.
Question Assesses
Content Area IV—Professional Values and Ethics; Confidentiality
(Competency); Legal and/or Ethical Issues Regarding
Confidentiality, Including Electronic Information Security (KSA)
27. C. The “reasonable suspicion” of the social worker makes reporting
to the child protection agency necessary. This report should not be
delayed to monitor the situation. The social worker should tell the
mother of the need to report and support the mother and child
through the process. Having the mother present when the socia
worker contacts the child protection agency may alleviate the
mother’s fears about what is being disclosed and the social worker
can help the mother to understand the next steps after such a
report is made.
Question Assesses
Content Area IV—Professional Values and Ethics; Confidentiality
(Competency); Legal and/or Ethical Issues Regarding Mandatory
Reporting (e.g., Abuse, Threat of Harm, Impaired Professionals,
etc.) (KSA)
2
444
8
.
A. A subpoena is a request by the court for information. The social
worker must respond. When receiving a subpoena, a social worker
should claim privilege and not turn over records unless the court
issues a subsequent court order to do so or the client grants
permission to release the information. A subpoena and a court
order are not the same. Social workers who receive court orders
should try to limit their scope and/or ask that records be sealed.
Question Assesses
621
Content Area IV—Professional Values and Ethics; Confidentiality
(Competency); Legal and/or Ethical Issues Regarding
Confidentiality, Including Electronic Information Security (KSA)
29. C. The client file cannot be shared with the principal even if the
information will assist the client. Social workers should not be
sharing information without consent unless necessary to prevent
harm to self or others.
Question Assesses
Content Area IV—Professional Values and Ethics; Confidentiality
(Competency); Legal and/or Ethical Issues Regarding
Confidentiality, Including Electronic Information Security (KSA)
30. B. Social workers should protect the confidentiality of deceased
clients consistent with the same standards that apply to those who
are living. The social worker should not disclose any information
about the client. There is no reason to have the son put his
questions in writing or to schedule a session to see him.
Question Assesses
Content Area IV—Professional Values and Ethics; Confidentiality
(Competency); Legal and/or Ethical Issues Regarding
Confidentiality, Including Electronic Information Security (KSA)
31. C. The mission of the social work profession is rooted in a set of
core values. These core values are the foundation of social work’s
unique purpose and perspective. The values stated in the preamble
of the NASW Code of Ethics are service, social justice, dignity and
worth of the person, importance of human relationships, integrity,
and competence.
Question Assesses
Content Area IV—Professional Values and Ethics; Professional
Development and Use of Self (Competency); Professional Values
and Principles (e.g., Competence, Social Justice, Integrity, and
Dignity and Worth of the Person) (KSA)
622
32. A. Clients with borderline personality disorder or its associated
features are more likely to engage in transference. Transference-
focused psychotherapy is, therefore, often used with clients who
have borderline personality disorder. Transference can be used
therapeutically and does not have to be sexual in nature.
Question Assesses
Content Area IV—Professional Values and Ethics; Professional
Development and Use of Self (Competency); The Impact of
Transference and Countertransference in the Social Worker–
Client/Client System Relationship (KSA)
445
446
623
447
Full-Length Practice Test448
624
170-Question Practice Test
449
This practice test contains 170 questions but remember that your score
on the actual examination will be based on 150 questions because 20
items are being piloted. As you won’t know which items will be scored
and determine whether or not you pass, you will need to complete all
170 questions. Thus, this test has 170 questions so that you can gauge
the length of time that it takes you to complete an equivalent number of
questions. The questions in each domain or area are in random order on
this practice test, as they are on the actual examination, and there is a
similar distribution of questions from each section as will appear on your
actual examination.
Human Development, Diversity, and Behavior in the Environment
41 Questions
Assessment, Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning
51 Questions
Psychotherapy, Clinical Interventions, and Case Management
46 Questions
Professional Values and Ethics
32 Questions
The best way to use this practice test is as a mock examination,
which means:
450
a. Take it AFTER you have completed your studying—do not memo
answers to these questions.
b. Do not apply the answers to these questions to the actual examina
or you may miss subtle differences in each question that can distingu
the correct from the incorrect response choices.
625
c. Take it in its entirety during a 4-hour block of time to show yourself
you can finish in the allotted time period for the examination.
d. Do not look up the correct answers until you are completely finished w
the entire practice test, and do not worry if you get questions incorr
Remember, this examination is not one in which you can expect to
all of the answers correct. The number of questions that y
will need to answer correctly generally varies from 90
107 correct of the 150 scored items.
451
1.
When a social worker is engaged in reunification therapy with a
parent and child, which is the MOST important factor to
consider?
A. Parent–child bond prior to separation
B. Comfort and needs of the child
C. Court-involvement in family matters
2. Which of the following is MOST likely the cause of risk-taking
behavior in teenagers?
A. Greater number of social contexts
B. Peer pressure and acceptance
C. Romanticization of harmful relationships
3. A social worker is meeting with an adult client who witnessed the
violent death of a friend a month ago. The client experienced
recurrent, distressing memories of the incident immediately after the
incident occurred, causing an inability to return to work. However, the
client reports that these negative troubling memories subsided in the
last week. Based on this report, with which of the following is the
client MOST likely to be diagnosed?
A. Acute stress disorder
B. Post-traumatic stress disorder
C. Repressed memories
4. Which of the following is the MOST important psychosocial aim for
adolescence?
626
A. Development of greater independence
B. Movement from egocentric to altruistic views
C. Recognition of complexity in intimate connections
5. When building resilience in adolescence, which of the following is
MOST important for a social worker to remember?
A. Resilience should be viewed within a community context rather
than an individual framework
B. Adolescents can have good outcomes despite threats to their
healthy development
C. A focus on resiliency should aim to reduce levels of exposure to
risk factors
6. A social worker is meeting with an adult client who has a loss of
appetite and problems sleeping in addition to a depressed mood. The
client reports that the symptoms have persisted for the last decade
despite attempts to remedy them. Which of the following diagnoses
BEST fits the client’s condition?
A. Major depressive disorder
B. Persistent depressive disorder
C. Low self-esteem
7. A social worker has just been hired at a high school and is concerned
about correctly maintaining the confidentiality of the students. Which
of the following will be MOST helpful in identifying the proper
protocols?
452
Obtaining a copy of the school policies and procedures
A.
B. C. Arranging a meeting with a supervisor
Reviewing the laws of the state or jurisdiction
8. Which of the following BEST differentiates the difference between
schizophreniform disorder and schizophrenia?
A. Severity of symptoms
B. Duration of symptoms
627
C. Types of symptoms
9. A White social worker is supervising an employee who is
Black/African American in a human service agency in the United
States. Using an antiracist approach, what will be MOST appropriate
for the social worker to remember when interacting with the
employee?
A. Current management practices are likely rooted in oppressive
and racist structures
B. The social worker will need to work harder to engage the
employee
C. The social worker will need to examine inherent positions of
privilege within the relationship
10. A social worker, who is only proficient in English, receives a referral
for a couple whose child has recently been placed in a residential
facility for adults with developmental disabilities. One partner has
limited English proficiency. The other partner offers to assist with
translation so that the social worker can assist with a problem that
emerged due to the placement. In this situation, the social worker
should:
A. Accept the referral once all parties agree that one partner will be
translating for the other
B. Refuse the referral as the social worker is not able to
communicate proficiently with both partners
C. Commence services once a qualified translator is identified
11. A social worker is meeting with a single mother and her three
children for an initial session. The social worker learns that one of
the children, a 14-year-old son, is sneaking out at night and
experiencing truancy at school. When speaking with the son, he
states that he does not have to listen to his mother and is treated
like a baby even though he is the “man of the house.” The other two
children rarely speak, instead comforting the mother who sobs
throughout the interview. After engaging with family members, the
social worker should NEXT:
A. Identify the roles expectations of family members for themselves
628
and others
B. Explore the impact of the son’s behavior on family functioning
and communication
C. Request school records for the children to understand their
performance outside the family unit
12. Which of the following is BEST practice in disclosing clinical
diagnoses to clients as part of social work practice?
453
A.
Social workers should only discuss the names of and
rationales for clinical diagnoses with clients if they ask about
them
B. Clients should be fully informed of the names of and
rationales for their clinical diagnoses if the information does
not cause harm
C. Clients should be fully informed of the names of and
rationales for their clinical diagnoses in all instances
13. A client tells a social worker that he has stopped taking his
medication and is experiencing delusional thoughts. He states that
he will never be taking this medication again. The social worker
should FIRST:
A. Speak to the client about maladaptive feelings and behaviors
that will likely emerge
B. Identify what factors in the client’s life may have contributed to
this recent decision
C. Suggest that the client try a different medication to address his
delusional thoughts
14. Which of the following theories provides the BEST evidence for the
mind-body connection?
A. Person-in-environment theory
B. Systems theory
C. Psychodynamic theory
15. A social work manager discovers that the agency is operating at a
30% client vacancy rate with most programs operating under
629
capacity. When speaking with the staff, the social work manager
learns that new referrals have been turned away due to staff
vacancies. Existing staff are not sure that they can handle
increased demand due to the number of job openings. Many of the
staff vacancies result from low pay. Which of the following actions is
MOST likely to reduce client vacancies?
A. Agreeing to proportionally increase the pay of all existing agency
staff
B. Creating a performance-based incentive plan linked to staff
compensation
C. Increasing the starting salary for all new personnel hired
16. A social worker is working with a 17-year-old girl who has a strong
acuity for and interest in computer programming but does not want
to pursue it as a career as she “does not see a future in it for me.”
She makes many comments about how she is the only female in
many of her computer courses in high school. The client has
delayed looking at college programs which the social worker feels is
due to an inner desire by the client to pursue computer
programming despite what she states. Which of the following will be
MOST helpful in assisting the client?
A. Exploring the client’s feelings about gender stereotypes and past
female role models
B. Identifying colleges with the client that have a wide variety of
majors
C. Arranging meetings for the client to interact with women who
have careers in computer programming
17.
A non-profit agency board of directors identifies the lack of racial
diversity in its management staff. Persons of color are then hired
for senior management positions but are often excluded from key
decision making. The board of directors praises the increased
454
efforts made at hiring more diverse staff, but do not review the
management practices or policies of the organization to ensure that
they are antiracist. Which BEST describes the hiring actions of the
board of directors?
A. Systematic discrimination
630
B. Tokenization
C. Bigotry
18. A social worker is working with a client who identifies as “gender
fluid.” What is MOST likely the meaning of the client’s use of this
language?
A. Ambivalence about personal gender identity
B. Open to changing gender expression or identity
C. Living as the gender opposite of that assigned at birth
19. A social worker suspects that a client may either have cyclothymic
disorder or bipolar I disorder. Which of the following will BEST help
in making the differential diagnosis?
A. Age of the client
B. Severity of the symptoms
C. Biopsychosocial functioning
20. A social worker at a homeless shelter for adult women is contacted
by a 14-year-old girl as she was evicted from her home by her
parents who no longer have any contact with her. She reports that
the parents were not abusive but were upset with her substance
use and truancy from school. She states that she may be able to
stay with a friend next week so only needs short-term housing in the
shelter. The social worker should FIRST:
A. Facilitate a referral of the girl to the child protection agency
B. Ask the agency director whether the girl can be served given her
short-term need
C. Arrange to meet with the girl to complete an intake assessment
21. A social worker meets with a 20-year-old client who is having
trouble functioning at home and in the community. For the last year,
the client has had severe verbal outbursts and an angry mood daily.
The social worker diagnoses the client with disruptive mood
dysregulation disorder, which has never been assigned to this client
before. The supervisor disagrees with the diagnosis. Which of the
following is the basis of the supervisor’s objection?
631
A. Symptomology presented
B. Age of the client
C. Chronicity of symptoms
22. A social worker is meeting with a 26-year-old client for the first time.
During the meeting, the client tells the social worker about events
that happened yesterday which include being fearful as someone
was “trying to get him.” The client states that he has been “followed
for years” and he fears for his safety. In order to meet the needs of
the client, the social worker should FIRST:
455
A.
B. C. Assess the client for paranoia and other psychotic
disturbance
Complete a biopsychosocial evaluation with the client
Ask the client more about incidents of concern which have
occurred over the years
23. A social worker has been working with a teen for several years
before learning that the client will be attending college out of state
and would like to receive services from the social worker using
electronic methods. The social worker is licensed in the client’s
home state, but not the state where the client will be attending
college. Which statement MOST likely describes the social
worker’s legal authority in this situation?
A. The social worker is authorized by the home state regulatory
board to serve the client at college as long as only electronic
services are provided out of state
B. Most states do not have regulations that govern such situations,
allowing social workers to use their professional discretion
C. The social worker needs a regular or telehealth license in the
state in which the client is attending college
24. Which of the following are the MOST distinguishing indicators of
toxic stress?
A. Prolonged duration
B. Adverse health outcomes
C. Intensity of stimuli
632
25. A social worker employed in an substance use treatment agency
notices a 17-year-old client appears to be in distress in the common
area. The client recently completed a detoxification program for
opioid use and is attending day treatment. The client is
unresponsive and has labored breathing. After calling for
emergency assistance, the social worker should NEXT:
A. Ask others about the client’s behavior
B. Contact the client’s parents
C. Administer naloxone to the client
26. A social worker is charged with developing a new service program.
Which of the following will be MOST critical for informing program
design?
A. Provider competition
B. Agency resources
C. Needs assessment
27. A social worker is working with a client who has recently been
evicted due to underemployment. The client appears to qualify for
subsidized housing which is means tested. The client has
experienced many adversities due to the lack of stable housing
including depression, anxiety, and isolation. In order to BEST
assist the client, the primary focus of intervention should be to:
A. Help the client obtain fiscal records and asset verification
B. Address the client’s current emotional state
C. Support the client in finding another job
456
28.
A social worker believes that a client has antisocial personality
disorder. On which of the following behaviors or feelings is the
social worker likely to base the assessment?
A. Poor descriptions of self-worth and competency
B. Difficulty starting a new task and working independently
C. Conning others for pleasure or personal profit
29. A social worker has been providing teletherapy via video
633
conferencing to a single mother for several months. The social
worker notices that the client is very distracted in sessions by her
children fighting in the background and a lot of people moving about
the house. In order to BEST address the situation, the social
worker should:
A. Recognize the distractions and their impact on the client’s
current well-being
B. Request that the client find a private place to speak to the social
worker
C. Suggest coping skills that can assist the client with stressors in
her environment
30. A social worker wants data on the causes and prevalence of heart
disease in a geographic region for a grant application to help
prevent and manage the disease. What type of research is the
social worker interested in conducting?
A. Experimental
B. Epidemiological
C. Explanatory
31. A social worker is hired at a day treatment program for people with
psychotic disorders. The social worker is responsible for collecting
data on the mental status of clients daily. What data collection
method will be MOST effective in collecting the needed
information?
A. Interviews
B. Self-administered screening
C. Observations
32. A client reports that she was brutally raped as a child and has
difficulty connecting with others. She often has difficulty expressing
her emotions. The client would like to have more friends but feels
that relationships are not formed as others do not get a chance to
get to know her. Which of the following interventions by the social
worker will BEST assist the client?
A. Modeling social interactions when meeting with the client
634
B. Ensuring that the client understands that her past trauma
impacts all aspects of functioning
C. Helping the client to identify ways to meet others socially
33. Which of the following social work values is MOST critical to
consider when doing motivational interviewing with a client?
A. Self-determination
B. Confidentiality
C. Consent
3
457
4
.
A social worker employed at a community action agency learns
about a long-standing problem that has not been addressed.
Central to filling the need is program development and fundraising.
When speaking individually to clients, each recognizes the need
but states, “I am not sure what I can do about it.” Which of the
following roles will be MOST critical for the social worker to help
engage clients in addressing the issue?
A. Advocate
B. Mobilizer
C. Broker
35. A social worker, employed in a large governmental human service
organization, notices that there is little racial diversity within upper
administration with few people of color in decision-making positions.
The direct services staff workforce is quite diverse with many
people of color providing services to clients. Which of the following
statements MOST likely describes the reason for this disparity?
A. Few people of color seek management positions within the
organization
B. Recruitment efforts lack attention to attract a diverse candidate
pool
C. Promotional practices and policies are institutionally biased
635
36. Based on the onset of symptoms, when in the life course is autism
spectrum disorder MOST likely to be diagnosed?
A. Adolescents
B. Early childhood
C. School age
37. A social worker provides a managed care company with a
psychiatric diagnosis needed to authorize services. The managed
care company asks for more information, such as case notes and
other records, to support the assessment. What is MOST likely the
concern of the managed care company request?
A. Validity of the diagnosis
B. Prognosis for treatment
C. Cost of care
38. A social worker must make a differential diagnosis between
obsessive-compulsive disorder and obsessive-compulsive
personality disorder. Which of the following will be MOST helpful in
making the distinction?
A. Examination of the client’s personal relationships
B. Determination of client’s distress due to thoughts, feelings,
and/or actions
C. Review of client’s past history of mental health treatment
39. After several meetings, a 23-year-old client confesses to a social
worker that someone has hacked into his computer and speaks to
him through the device about embezzling his money. He is fearful
as he has also noticed that people are loitering on the street outside
his house, leaving him to wonder if they are planning to rob him. To
assist the client, the social worker should FIRST:
458
A.
B. C. Determine whether the client has experienced similar events
in the past
Assess the client for psychosis
Assure the client that he is not in danger
636
40. In psychoanalysis, what does dream analysis attempt to
understand?
A. Delusional tendencies
B. Unconscious desires
C. Sexual drives
41. A client of a social worker is a long-time illicit barbiturate user, but
now tells the social worker that she will be quitting “cold turkey.”
Which of the following supports will be MOST important during this
process?
A. Medical monitoring
B. Social support
C. Psychological counseling
42. A social worker is working with a 35-year-old client who is in the
early stages of recovery from addiction. The client is feeling alone
and hopeless but is concerned about connecting with others due to
confidentiality given professional status. Which of the following
treatments will MOST likely be appropriate for this client?
A. Medication assisted treatment intervention
B. Group therapy
C. Individual therapy
43. A social worker is working with a couple who has struggled with
infertility and has decided to pursue surrogacy. They express
nervousness about the process and the rights of all parties. Their
anxiety has been fueled by relatives, aware of their decision, who
ask them questions which they are not able to answer. In order to
BEST assist the couple, the social worker should:
A. Recommend that the couple review federal laws and protections
afforded to surrogates and parents
B. Assure the couple that many people have the same feelings
when they begin the surrogacy process
C. Review state/jurisdictional laws related to surrogacy with the
couple to identify specific concerns
637
44. A social worker has received consent from the parent of a 14-year-
old girl to provide therapy to address her depression and anxiety.
After several months, the parent contacts the social worker and
would like a copy of the record. In accordance with legal and ethical
guidelines, the social worker should:
A. Provide the parent with a copy of the record and let the client
know that the release has occurred
B. Ask the client whether the parent can have access to the record
C. Refuse to provide a copy of the record as the information is
confidential
4
459
5
.
A social worker has a client who lives with a large extended family.
The family is a critical support system, with the client reporting the
importance of family gatherings centered around food and activities
related to the client’s culture. During a home visit, the client invites
the social worker to join the family in tasting ethnic food that are
being prepared for an upcoming celebration. In this situation, the
social worker should:
A. Refuse the invitation as it jeopardizes the boundaries associated
with professional roles
B. Agree to taste the food as it is central to the client’s cultural
traditions
C. Ask the client why the request to join the family in tasting the
food was made
46. A client who left the agency many years ago contacts the social
worker for a copy of an assessment. The social worker finds that
the agency retained the record even though the length of time
exceeds its record retention policy. In order to properly address the
situation, the social worker should:
A. Provide the client with a copy of the assessment after explaining
that it was kept longer than usual
B. Deny the client’s request as it is beyond the record retention
policy
638
C. Ask the client why the assessment is being requested
47. An agency provides face-to-face and remote services via
technology to clients. A social worker finds that a client is frequently
missing appointments due to his work schedule and cannot attend
remotely as he does not have a computer. He states that remote
access would be much more convenient, but it will be several
months until he can save the money for the appropriate technology.
In order to BEST meet the client’s needs, the social worker should:
A. Suggest to the client that he wait until he has purchased a
computer to continue services
B. Explore with the client any possible accommodations that can be
made by the employer
C. Advocate with the agency director for the client to be given a
computer to use for remote services
48. Which of the following describes best practice when obtaining client
consent for release of information?
A. Social workers should ask clients during the first session to
designate which documents can be released to which third
parties
B. Social workers should meet with clients to review each third-
party request and document to be released to obtain consent
separately for each release
C. Social workers should obtain client consent at intake and at least
yearly thereafter for releasing information to third parties
49. A social worker is meeting with the parents of a 4-year-old who
drowned in their swimming pool 2 years ago. Treatment planning
focused on the need for the parents to address their unresolved
grief. To help the parents cope with the loss of their child, the social
worker should:
A. Educate the parents about the stages of mourning after
traumatic events
B. Refer the parents to a support group focused on grief and loss
C. Facilitate expression of the parent’s grief and its impact on their
daily lives
639
460
50.
When using a Bowenian family therapy approach, which of the
following is a critical factor in determining an individual’s
differentiation of self?
A. Sibling position
B. Gender roles
C. Repressed urges
51. A social worker is working with an adult client who is incarcerated.
The client was recently found with illicit drugs while in prison after
attesting vehemently to the social worker that she did not have
them. Based on the client’s assertion, the social worker had
attested the client’s innocence to the prison administration. The
social worker shares with the client how the client’s lying made the
social worker feel betrayed. The sharing of these feelings by the
social worker is MOST likely done to:
A. Engage in authentic responding to help the client understand the
importance of honesty in the helping relationship
B. Assist the client to understand that the social worker is
nonjudgmental and would have kept the information about the
drugs confidential
C. Inform the client that the social workers cares about the client
and needs to be part of the client’s support system
52. A social worker, who is conducting a mental status examination,
asks a client to name as many articles of clothing as possible in a
minute. What is the social worker MOST likely assessing by this
client request?
A. Appearance
B. Cognition
C. Speech
53. Which of the following situations BEST describes the presence of
preconventional moral reasoning?
A. A client does not come late to an appointment for fear of being
reprimanded by the social worker
640
B. A client disagrees with a social worker’s assessment but does
not speak up to not offend the social worker
C. A client reports to a social worker that a friend made an offensive
comment but the comment was ignored to maintain the
relationship
54. A client reports employment changes that will likely impact her
income. She is worried about her ability to meet her monthly
expenses. In this situation, the social worker should FIRST:
A. Refer the client to financial assistance programs to assist with
meeting needs
B. Ask the client to identity her regular bills and expenses
C. Determine the nature of the employment changes
5
461
5
.
A social worker in a child welfare organization is working with a
family in which abuse and neglect against a child has been
substantiated. The social worker is identifying a resource family for
the child to stay with long-term while also simultaneously referring
the parents to psychotherapy and parenting skills groups. What
BEST describes the approach being used by the social worker?
A. Harm reduction
B. Concurrent planning
C. Kinship care
56. A former client comes to see a social worker several months after
the death of the client’s child. The social worker met the child many
times and has lots of positive memories about the interactions. The
former client seems eager to speak about her child, engaging the
social worker in conversation about the child. When speaking with
the former client about the child, the social worker should:
A. Recall meaningful stories about the child when appropriate
B. Stress the need to deal with current issues
C. Express sympathy and respect for loss experienced by the
641
former client
57. A social worker is very concerned as a colleague is experiencing
symptoms of unresolved grief due to the death of a spouse. The
colleague is distracted when meeting with clients and has missed
several program meetings due to fatigue caused by sleep
disturbance. The colleague appears unaware of the impact of the
grief. The social worker should FIRST:
A. Report the concerns to a supervisor so the colleague can be
properly supported
B. Speak to the colleague directly about observed problems in job
performance
C. Document concerns about the colleague’s behavior as related to
employment duties
58. A social worker is working with 15-year-old transgender client who
is being bullied at school. The client is isolated and displays
behaviors associated with poor self-esteem. The client would like to
have friends but states that classmates are guarded and avoid
interactions. Which of the following is MOST likely the root cause
of the client’s problems?
A. Lack of social and coping skills needed in new gender roles
B. Fear and discrimination against those who are transgender
C. Psychosocial stress associated with assuming a different gender
59. A social worker is seeing a 14-year-old client whose parents are
concerned about his level of isolation. The client reports that the
parents are exaggerating and that he has friends, but often prefers
to be alone. When doing an assessment with the client, which of the
following tools will be MOST helpful to the social worker in
identifying whether a problem exists?
A. School records
B. Genogram
C. Ecomap
642
60.A social worker is referred a 17-year-old woman for counseling
due to anxiety and depression. Though she is a high school honor
student, the client is questioning whether she wants to attend
462
college. She recently broke up with her boyfriend of many years
and has “sworn off dating men.” She has gained weight and begun
to dress differently. What should the social worker FIRST ask the
client about in this situation?
A. Mental health challenges that have occurred in the past
B. Identity formation and views of self-concept
C. Social pressures from friends and family
61. A client, who lives alone and is morbidly obese, tells a social worker
that he would like to lose weight as his size is interfering with his
daily functioning. After referring the client to a physician who says
that there are no medical problems, the social worker should
FIRST:
A. Evaluate whether the client is a candidate is for weight loss
surgery
B. Focus on the clients’ use of overeating as a coping mechanism
C. Assess the clients access to nutritious foods
62. A social worker is working with an elderly couple. The husband has
Alzheimer’s disease and needs significant support from the wife
who has been his primary caregiver for years. In the last week, the
wife has been found disoriented in the neighborhood with obvious
signs of neglect. Which of the following factors is MOST likely the
cause of the wife’s condition?
A. Chronic stress associated with caregiving for the husband
B. Aggressive behavior of the husband that resulted in abuse of the
wife
C. Degenerative disease due to the wife’s own aging process
63. A social worker realizes when a client shows up for an initial
appointment that she is deaf and communicates through the use of
American Sign Language (ASL). The social worker is not proficient
643
in ASL but has had some basic training in its use. To BEST
address this situation, the social worker should:
A. Exchange written notes with the client during the session to get
the information needed
B. Communicate with the client using ASL to the maximum extent
possible to complete the intake
C. Explain to the client that the session needs to be rescheduled so
an interpreter can be accessed
64. A social worker has a client who is a person of color but has a very
light complexion, causing her to be frequently mistaken as White.
The client reports that people often make racist statements in front
of her as they do not realize that she is a person of color. When she
explains to them the offensiveness of their comments, they are
always apologetic. In which of the following ways will these
experiences MOST likely impact the client?
A. The client will likely have better expressive communication skills
due to her advocacy efforts
B. The client’s identity development will likely be adversely
impacted by exposure to racism
C. The client will likely be more marginalized and oppressed due to
feelings of isolation
6
463
5
.
A social worker is providing therapy to a mother and her 10-year-
old child due to emotional issues resulting from a contentious
divorce. The father of the child recently petitioned the court to
receive sole custody. The social worker has observed positive
interactions between the mother and child, noting the strong
attachment that the child has to the mother. The mother asks the
social worker to write a letter to the court recommending joint
custody. To handle this situation ethically, the social worker should:
A. Provide a letter with the recommendation to the court as it is in
the best interest of the child
B. Inform the mother that a child custody recommendation cannot
644
be made due to a conflict of interest
C. Ask to meet with the daughter individually to determine her views
about custody arrangements
66. After working for a child welfare agency for several years, a social
worker experiences moral distress rooted in the working conditions.
In order to BEST handle this situation ethically, the social worker
should:
A. Seek supervision and consultation to increase coping skills
associated with work stressors
B. Consider changing positions within the agency to alleviate
burnout and secondary trauma
C. Advocate to increase resources and/or modify oppressive
practices or policies
67. A social worker is charged with ordering supplies for an agency’s
social service programs. The social worker learns that the vendor
gives reward points for each purchase that can be used toward self-
care promotions such as massages, fitness instruction, and
sportswear. The supplier tells the social worker that the points are
for the personal use of the employee ordering the products. In this
situation, the social worker should:
A. Inform the vendor that the reward points cannot be used
personally
B. Review human resource documents outlining agency policies
about use of such promotions
C. Identify how the points were utilized in the past by other
employees in this role
68. During pregnancy, a couple learn through prenatal testing that their
child will be born with significant disabilities. The couple decides to
terminate the pregnancy based on this diagnosis. Which type of
result would threaten the basis of their decision?
A. False positive
B. Curvilinear
C. False negative
645
69. A social worker is working with a client who reports significant sleep
disturbance during the past year. The client has been seen by a
physician who can find no medical reason for the sleeplessness.
The client is having difficulty concentrating on the job and has fallen
asleep at work. The client states that he will be fired if the behavior
continues. In order to assist the client, the social worker should
FIRST:
464
A.
B. C. Identify complementary therapies such as meditation and
mindfulness to assist him
Determine if changes in the client’s life may have resulted in
sleeping problems
Refer the client to a physician to see if medication can be
prescribed to assist with sleeping
70. Which of the following is the MOST significant problem associated
with reversal designs in single-subject research?
A. Lack of generalizability to other clients and situations
B. Poor internal validity demonstrating cause-effect
C. Ethical challenges associated with withdrawing the treatment
71. A social worker is notified by the court about the need to testify
about a client who has been receiving substance use services for
the last 6 months. The client was involved in an assault prior to
treatment but was not mandated by the court to receive services.
The client has made substantial progress and has not been using
substances. The social worker has no experience in forensic
practice. The social worker should FIRST:
A. Seek consultation from a lawyer
B. Notify the client about the need to testify
C. Write to the court stating that all information is confidential
72. A 20-year-old client is concerned as she failed several college
courses last semester that were paid for by her parents. The
parents have threatened to call the university, after the daughter
has failed to show them her transcript but have not done so. While
the client feels bad about keeping the information from her parents,
646
she does not want them to know. What is the BEST response
when the client asks the social worker about what the university will
tell her parents if they call?
A. Universities vary in their policies about releasing information to
parents of students
B. Federal law protects her educational record from being released
to anyone without her permission
C. The transcript will be sent to the parents since they are the ones
paying for the courses
73. A social worker employed at an inpatient psychiatric hospital has
deemed a client severely depressed using the Beck Depression
Inventory. The social worker notices that the rating is consistent
with observed behaviors seen by staff on the inpatient unit so feels
confident in this diagnosis. Upon which of the following research
concepts is the social worker basing this confidence?
A. Internal validity
B. Test–retest reliability
C. Criterion-related validity
74. A social worker and client agree that the current intervention is not
working as no substantial progress has been made in several
months. The social worker should NEXT:
Revise the goals set forth in the client’s treatment plan
465
A.
B. Explore with the client the root cause of the presenting
C. problem
Seek consultation and supervision for new techniques to use
with the client
75. A social worker finds that a client, who was convicted of sexual
assault of a minor, is at high risk of reoffence. Which of the following
considerations is MOST important when treating this client?
A. Restricting access to potential victims
B. Education of the client’s support system about the risks
647
C. Ability of client to engage in cognitive behavioral therapy
76. Which BEST characterizes the behavior of a client who
exaggerates an illness to gain external benefit?
A. Malingering
B. Hypochondriacal
C. Grandiose
77. A social worker who works in a psychiatric hospital is told by a client
that a staff person in another unit is having sex with a client. To
appropriately handle this situation, the social worker should FIRST:
A. Report the allegation to the social worker’s supervisor
B. Evaluate the validity of the client’s report based on diagnosis and
treatment history
C. Ask the client reporting the incident to document the allegation in
writing
78. After meeting with a social worker for several therapy sessions, a
client states that several years ago she gave her mother excessive
pain medication that caused her death as the mother was terminally
ill and suffering greatly. The client feels guilty but is convinced that
she made the correct decision. The client has difficulty relating to
her father, who is in good health, due to the circumstances of her
mother’s death which have never been revealed. The social worker
should FIRST:
A. Inform the client that the situation needs to be reported to the
authorities
B. Help the client to identify measurable goals for her relationship
with her father
C. Determine the vulnerability of the father to potential harm by the
client
79. During the fifth meeting with a social worker, a client mentions her
place of employment and the name of her boss. The boss is the
parent of a very close friend of the social worker’s daughter. In this
situation, the social worker should:
648
A. Refrain from mentioning the relationship between the social
worker and boss as it is irrelevant
B. Refer the client to another social worker in the agency to avoid
any conflict of interest
C. Disclose the nature of the relationship between the social worker
and boss to the client
8
466
0
.
A social worker who recently divorced due to infidelity by a spouse
becomes increasingly upset with a client who is having an affair.
The client has been dating a coworker for a year, being careful to
hide the relationship. In order to BEST meet the needs of the
client, the social worker should:
A. Disclose the feelings to the client to determine if a referral to
another social worker is warranted
B. Encourage the client to be honest with her spouse
C. Acknowledge the feelings and discuss them with a supervisor
81. Which of the following is MOST likely to determine whether a
marriage ends after infidelity of one spouse?
A. Whether the affair involved sexual contact by the spouse who
was unfaithful
B. Culture of the spouse who was not having the affair
C. Age of the spouse who was unfaithful
82. A social worker is meeting with a 20-year-old college student who is
unhappy due to his major. He admits that his current choice of study
was heavily influenced by his parents. He is unsure of his career
plans but knows that he would be much happier studying another
subject. The client is worried that his parents will be angry with him.
The social worker asks him to identify ten things that are personally
important regarding future employment. The social worker is
MOST likely making this request to:
A. Prepare the client for a conversation with his parents about his
649
career choice
B. Assess the client’s ability to make decisions independent of his
parents
C. Help the client to determine a major that is more suited to his
interests
83. A social worker is meeting with a client whose mother has recently
entered a nursing home. The client talks at length about the event,
expressing both sadness at her mother’s loss of independence and
relief due to the strain of caring for her at home. The social worker
comments, “l am not sure that I am clear about what you are
feeling.” The intent of the social worker’s statement is MOST likely
to:
A. Demonstrate to the client that the social worker is listening
B. Ensure that the social worker understands what the client is
saying
C. Help the client to better understand the emotions that are
impacting this transition
84. Which is the primary aim of summarizing progress with a client at
the beginning of weekly meetings?
A. Providing continuity of treatment since the last session
B. Identifying the social worker’s treatment goals for the current
meeting
C. Ensuring that the client understands the progress made to date
85. A social worker is meeting with a client who is reluctant to leave his
job though he is miserable at work. The social worker asks, “What
do you think would happen if you resigned?” The social worker is
MOST likely asking this question to:
467
A.
B. Determine the coping skills that the client has to handle
stress
Help the client identify the restraining forces for employment
change
C. Assess the emotional attachment that the client has to his
boss and colleagues
650
86. The primary purpose of a social worker using attending behaviors
during the problem-solving process is to:
A. Provide alternative viewpoints to enhance a client’s
understanding of a problem
B. Convey empathy for the client’s situation
C. Strengthen the therapeutic alliance between a social worker and
client
87. Which of the following is the MOST significant risk of using a
standardized client intake form during an initial meeting with a
client?
A. Gathering information that is not tailored to the presenting
problem of a client
B. Appearing uncaring about a client’s individual needs
C. Ignoring the value of open-ended questioning to better
understand a client’s life circumstances
88. The BEST reason for doing post-discharge telephone follow up
with a client is to:
A. Assess whether client has maintained progress obtained during
treatment
B. Ensure that client participates in any after-care services
C. Determine if the client is having other issues or problems
89. A social worker asks the client a leading question during the
assessment phase of the planned change process. The intent of
this question is MOST likely to:
A. Help the client to stay focused on issues to be discussed during
treatment
B. Obtain specific information from the client about the presenting
problem
C. Explore whether the client is motivated to make needed changes
90. A woman contacts a social worker as her spouse had an ongoing
affair that ended more than 2 years ago. The couple have
651
reconciled and have been getting along well. However, but the
woman states that she still feels betrayed and angry. Which of the
following treatment modalities will BEST assist the woman?
A. Individual counseling
B. Couples therapy
C. Mutual aid support
91. A client is complaining that she has little patience with her children
when they are not in school. The client feels that she has grown
distant from them, and the parent-child relationship is dysfunctional.
The social worker asks, “What could you do to make the situation
with your children even worse?” The social worker asked this
question MOST likely to:
A. Identify whether the client is listening or showing detachment in
this setting as well
468
Assess the level of commitment that the client has to change the
B.
situation with the children
C. Generate ideas about how to improve the relationship between
the client and her children
92. During an initial meeting with a client, he talks at length about the
problems that he is experiencing and how he is “overwhelmed.” The
social worker asks the client, “How can I help you?” This question is
being used by the social worker is to:
A. Focus the client on solutions rather than problems
B. Demonstrate to the client that the social worker is there to assist
C. Determine if the client has specific expectations for treatment
93. A social worker observes a play session in which a couple interact
with their small children. The social worker sees that the couple
encourage a child to “go play with the toys,” but then reprimand the
same child for leaving the couple’s side. Which of the following
communication issues is involved in this interaction between the
couple and child?
A. Metacommunication
B. Double bind
652
C. Negative feedback loop
94. A social worker is providing services to a client who is involved in a
contentious divorce. The client is worried about the therapy records
being court ordered in the child custody dispute as they were in the
past. In order to BEST protect confidentiality of the client, the social
worker should:
A. Maintain psychotherapy notes in a separate file than the client
record
B. Only put material in the case file that will reflect positively about
the client
C. Minimize documentation made about client problems or issues
95. An elderly client is being discharged from the hospital to the home
of his son. The client was hospitalized for diverticulitis though he
was unaware that he had the condition before admission. Which of
the following is going to be MOST important for the social worker to
include in discharge planning?
A. Goals for the client after leaving the hospital
B. Education for the client and his son about the condition and the
client’s ongoing dietary needs
C. Summary of the treatments that have been provided to the client
after admission
96. A social worker employed at a homeless shelter receives a referral
for a 23-year-old woman and her two children. The family has
significant hardships including chronic poverty and homelessness.
The mother reports being hospitalized for mental health in the past
and one of the children has developmental disabilities which greatly
impair functioning. There is some concern about the risk of the
children for abuse and neglect. Which of the following factors
should be assessed FIRST in determining risk to the children?
Ability of the family to secure and maintain housing
469
A.
B. Level of need of the child with developmental disabilities
C. Mother’s mental health status
653
97. A social worker contemplating developing a sliding scale fee for his
private practice that is based on the client’s income. Which of the
following is the MOST significant concern about this approach?
A. The fee structure does not account for the expenses of the client
B. All clients should be treated the same regardless of income
C. Clients’ fees may change during the course of treatment if their
earnings change
98. A social worker begins therapy with a 13-year-old girl who has
divorced parents. Both parents wanted treatment for the daughter,
but the father called after several weeks to indicate that he does not
consent and wants the social worker to discontinue services. The
social worker feels that the daughter greatly benefitted from
services, and the child’s other parent is very supportive of the
treatment. In this situation, the social worker should:
A. Meet with the daughter one more time to develop a termination
plan
B. Inform all parties that treatment must end immediately given the
lack of consent by both parents
C. Contact the other parent about the situation with a request to see
the child custody agreement
99. A client tells a social worker that she does not want to receive a
vaccination required for her job. The client learns that her employer
makes her attest to her vaccination, but she does not have to show
her vaccination card. The client plans to be deceitful. The client
lives with her two small children and her elderly parents. What will
be MOST important for the social worker to discuss with the client?
A. She will likely be fired from her job if her employer discovers that
she lied
B. Her vaccination may protect her children and parents from
becoming ill
C. Vaccinations are thoroughly tested for safety, and she will have
no adverse effects
100. A social worker employed by a child welfare organization
654
responds to a complaint by a concerned relative about domestic
violence within the household. When arriving at the house, both
parents and the children seem reluctant to speak to the social
worker. In this situation, the social worker should FIRST:
A. Interview the family together to ensure consistency of responses
B. Speak to each parent and child separately to obtain their views
about family life
C. Assure all family members that they have done nothing wrong
101.
A social worker is helping a client using a cognitive behavioral
approach. The social worker asks the client to keep a journal and
briefly describe any situations that lead to unpleasant feelings. The
client is instructed to include any initial thoughts that first
470
entered the client’s mind in these situations. In order to assist
the client, the social worker should NEXT:
A. Assist the client to avoid these situations in the future so the
thoughts do not reemerge
B. Help the client to identify patterns and root causes of negative
thinking
C. Work with the client to determine the consequences of these
thoughts
102. A client confesses that she is very angry with a friend over an
incident that happened the night before. The social worker asks
the client to rate her anger on a scale from 1 to 10. The social
worker is MOST likely using this scaling technique to:
A. Determine the intensity of the emotion that the client is feeling
B. Help the client to be more accurate in describing her feelings
C. Encourage the discussion of a sensitive issue for the client
103. A social worker who is meeting a new client for the first time uses
the incorrect pronoun to refer to the client. The client corrects the
social worker. To appropriately handle the situation, the social
worker should NEXT:
A. Apologize to the client for the mistake
B. Help the client to understand the reasons for the mistake
655
C. Praise the client for correcting the social worker
104. A social worker has been doing teletherapy with a client for many
months. During a session, the social worker notices that the client,
who appears fully clothed, is lying in bed. The social worker feels
uncomfortable speaking with the client while the client is in bed. In
this situation, the social worker should:
A. Ask the client to move to another location that is more
appropriate
B. Reflect on why the social worker is having these feelings
C. Acknowledge that there is likely a reason that the client is in bed
105. A social worker obtains a job at an agency delivering therapy to
older adults. At the time of employment, the agency wants the
social worker to sign a document that states that the social worker
will not provide services to clients after leaving the agency for any
reason. When the social worker asks about the reason for the
document, the social worker is told that it is used as there was a
problem in the past with a social worker soliciting clients in order
to start a private practice. In order to handle this situation ethically,
the social worker should:
A. Sign the document as it is inappropriate for a social worker to
solicit clients for a private practice
B. Consult with an attorney to determine if this policy is legally
allowed
C. Inform the agency that such an agreement cannot be signed as it
limits self-determination of clients
106.
A social worker, who is dating another agency employee,
learns that she will be promoted to be the director of the unit to
which the employee is assigned. The couple have not made
471
their relationship public so no one is aware that they are in a
personal relationship. In order to BEST address the issue, the
social worker should:
A. Determine whether any conflicts of interest exist before
accepting promotion to the new role
B. Inform human resources about the relationship so that an
656
independent evaluation can occur
C. Decline the promotion without stating the reason for decision
107. A social worker would like to use a data collection method which
has high validity but is not as concerned about reliability. Given
these concerns, which of the following methods is MOST
appropriate?
A. Self-administered questionnaire
B. Unstructured interview
C. Structured interview
108. A social worker is working with a couple, who is undocumented,
and their three children who are living in a basement apartment.
The apartment is in disrepair causing a poor life quality for the
family. The social worker has been urging the couple to speak to
the landlord about making some needed repairs but they have not
done so. To appropriately handle the situation, the social worker
should FIRST:
A. Acknowledge that the couple may be hesitant due to
discrimination
B. Help the couple to see the urgency of the situation
C. Encourage the couple to stop paying rent until the repairs are
completed
109. While driving, a social worker sees a woman and two children in
the median of a highway asking for money. They are holding a
sign describing their situation which uses both English and
Spanish words. The spot where they are standing is dangerous
and the social worker fears for their welfare. The social worker
wants to call the police but is worried about doing so. What is
MOST likely the basis of the social worker’s concern?
A. The police do not have access to social services that the family
appears to need
B. There may be difficulty with the family communicating with law
enforcement officials
C. The family’s behavior may result in separation and/or
657
criminalization
110. A social worker, raised in a religious household that condemns the
legalization of abortion, feels strongly that she would never
choose to terminate a pregnancy. The social worker has been
offered a job in a college counseling agency and is told that
students often raise issues about reproductive options in therapy.
In this situation, the social worker should FIRST:
A. Decline the position as there are potentially too many conflicts of
interest
B. Assess her ability to educate and support students on all
reproductive options including abortion
C. Disclose her personal beliefs about reproductive rights to
determine if they conflict with agency policy
1
472
1
1.
A social worker learns that a client has been involuntarily
committed to a psychiatric hospital after being brought to an
emergency room by the police due to an injury resulting from an
altercation with another person. Based on these actions, which of
the following can be assumed by the social worker?
A. The incident was caused by the client’s aggression
B. The client is a danger to self or others
C. Hospitalization is likely to be lengthy given the severity of the
client’s mental and physical problems
112. A child welfare social worker must visit the home of a Hmong
family who emigrated from Laos to the United States in the past 2
years. The allegation involves neglect by the parents toward their
five children, aged 2 months through 16 years, and there is a
concern about the family’s 16-year-old daughter who is pregnant.
When the social worker arrives at the home, he finds little food in
the cupboards. The parents state everything is fine, but the older
daughter must find another place to live. In order to appropriately
address the situation, the social worker should FIRST:
658
A. Identify resources to get food for the family to address
malnutrition
B. Investigate whether the children have experienced physical or
sexual abuse
C. Inquire how the members of the family care for one another
according to customs and traditions
113. Which of the following is the MOST important reason that social
workers should be educated about sexuality and sexual health?
A. Clients may be reluctant to talk about sexual intimacy due to
their traditions and customs
B. Sexual health impacts emotional, social, and physical well-being
C. Sexual orientation can be the root cause of family problems and
discriminatory practices
114. Which of the following is the MOST critical threat to efficacy when
social workers in agency settings consistently serve clients with
the same identified problems?
A. New evidence-based practices to treat client problems will not be
identified
B. Differences in client circumstances that impact assessment and
treatment will not be considered
C. Social work burnout is more likely to occur due to repeatedly
listening to the same client problems
115. A social worker is meeting with a new client for the first time who
reports having erectile dysfunction in the last 6 months. Recently,
he has been fighting with his wife constantly and is worried that
they will soon separate. The client reports feelings of self-doubt
and rejection which have caused him to feel inadequate. In this
situation, the social worker should FIRST:
A. Recommend that the client see a specialist who treats sexual
dysfunction
473
Refer him to his primary care physician for medical screening
B.
and treatment
659
C.Determine whether the problems with erective dysfunction are
caused by marital problems
116. The MOST important reason that a social worker documents as a
critical component of practice is to:
A. Allow both client and social worker to track progress and use
data in treatment decision-making
B. Protect the social worker and agency from malpractice claims
that are unfounded
C. Memorialize the services provided for future reference in case
the problem re-emerges
117. A social worker learns that “in vivo supervision” will be provided in
his new employment. Which of the following BEST describes the
nature of this supervision type?
A. The supervisor is in the room with the social worker and client to
be available for consultation
B. Taped sessions between a social worker and client are listened
to during supervision for feedback
C. The social worker is observed by the supervisor behind a one-
way mirror to ensure appropriate care
118. Which of the following is the MOST significant limitation of using
process recordings as the basis of social work supervision?
A. Information on the client is confidential so additional consent
needs to be obtained
B. Process recordings depend upon social workers accurately
observing interactions and occurrences
C. Social workers are not able to ask supervisors questions about
clinical treatment in real time
119. A social worker has decided to co-facilitate a group with another
mental health professional. Which of the following would be
MOST critical to ensuring the efficacy of this approach?
A. The two facilitators are recognized by group participants as
having equal responsibility for change
660
B. The two facilitators spend time outside of the group to coordinate
and process group activities
C. The two facilitators agree to use the same therapeutic
techniques when working with clients
120. A social worker is hired by an agency to address problems with
the burnout of their direct care staff. The social worker learns that
these employees, consisting mostly of people of color, often have
several jobs given their low pay and feel stressed as they do not
have enough administrative support. Their morale is low and
impacts on client care. Using a social justice approach, which of
the following actions should the social worker recommend?
474
A.
B. Enhancing the organizational structure so that these
employees have more administrative support
Raising compensation for these employees so they can
reduce their work hours to make a living wage
C. Implementing training initiatives to enhance the morale and
reduce stress of these employees
121. A client comes to a social worker as she is having difficulty
juggling multiple demands and is consistently missing deadlines.
The social worker and client determine the need for better time
management strategies. In order to develop an effective treatment
plan, the social worker will need to FIRST:
A. Understand the psychological reasons that the client has not
budgeted her time appropriately
B. Help the client understand that there is only so much that can be
accomplished in a single day
C. Determine client responsibilities according to their level of
importance so they can be prioritized
122. For which of the following diagnoses is a total lack of motivation a
common characteristic?
A. Schizophrenia
B. Trichotillomania
C. Borderline personality disorder
661
123. A school social worker is asked to join an administrative
committee as there is a desire to update forms that ask about
student gender. The administrator recognizes that the way that
gender is currently assessed on the forms may not include those
with all types of identities. The goal is to have these forms ready
for students to fill out in the upcoming school year. Which of the
following will be MOST important for the social worker to help the
group understand when revising the forms?
A. Gender identity is a very difficult construct to assess using forms
B. Some youth may not be familiar with the terms used on the
forms
C. Youth who are gender nonconforming are often stigmatized,
bullied, and discriminated against
124. A social worker agrees to work with a client using a qualified
interpreter as the social worker and client do not speak the same
language. During the first meeting, the client is very upset by the
recent death of her father and cries throughout the interview.
During the initial session, the social worker should FIRST:
A. Work with the client to understand the roles of the social worker
and interpreter in the helping process
B. Review confidentiality standards so the client feels comfortable
speaking openly with the interpreter
C. Ask about the cultural practices and mourning rituals of the
client’s family
475
125.
Which type of medication include benzodiazepines?
A. Antianxiety agents
B. Antidepressants
C. Antipsychotic drugs
126. A school social worker learns that a client has been diagnosed
with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. Which of the following
medications is the client MOST likely to be prescribed?
A. Stimulant
662
B. Mood stabilizer
C. Antianxiety
127. A client comes to a social worker for therapy due to the negative
impacts of a recent divorce on his well-being. During the initial
meeting, the client talks about lots of ways that the social worker
can assist him. The client is committed to getting services for “as
long as it takes.” Which of the following will be MOST important
for the social worker to review during the session?
A. Confidentiality and its limits
B. Parameters of the helping process
C. Expected length of service
128. During a meeting with a client, a social worker reflects on the
feelings and meaning of what the client states rather than the
actual spoken words. In this technique, which of the following is
the focus of the social worker’s communication?
A. Summarization
B. Clarification
C. Latent content
129. Which one of the following phases in the problem-solving process
is MOST influenced by case formulation?
A. Planning
B. Engagement
C. Intervention
130. A social worker fears that an elderly client is being abused as the
client has had unexplained bruising in recent months. Which of the
following factors places the client at the MOST risk?
A. The client has a degenerative condition that is progressively
impairing cognition and mobility
B. The client has a home caregiver with substance use and/or
mental health problems
C. The client has experienced social isolation in recent months due
663
to the loss of several close friends
476
131.
Which of the following therapies often uses prolonged
exposure to treat posttraumatic stress disorder?
A. Cognitive behavioral therapy
B. Existential therapy
C. Psychoanalytic therapy
132. A social worker in private practice learns that he has cancer that
will require aggressive treatment in the coming weeks. The social
worker plans to continue to work during his radiation and
chemotherapy but will not be accepting any new clients. In order
to address this situation ethically, the social worker should:
A. Educate clients about his medical diagnosis and the effects of
treatment so they know what to expect
B. Continue to provide services without disclosing his health status
since it will not impact services
C. Speak with his clients about their available treatment options
given his medical condition
133. According to standards of competence, which of the following
must occur for a social worker to possess cultural awareness and
humility?
A. Ensuring that client assessment forms include questions about
culture
B. Engaging in critical self-reflection of personal biases
C. Committing to lifelong continuing education about cultural
differences
134. Which of the following is the BEST definition of intersectionality
related to those served by social workers?
A. Interconnection of social categorizations that create
interdependent systems of client disadvantage
B. Interrelatedness of micro, mezzo, and major systems that
influence clients’ current life status
C. Repeated patterns of client behavior across the lifespan due to
664
unresolved issues from childhood
135. A new social worker lives in a rural community so he is worried
that there may be instances in which those he knows in other
contexts present themselves as clients. Which of the following will
be MOST effective in minimizing the impacts of dual
relationships?
A. Prescreening clients to ensure that they are not known to the
social worker before the onset of services
B. Ensuring that clients are aware during engagement that dual
relationships are forbidden in social work practice
C. Reviewing confidentiality mandates and client-social worker roles
throughout the problem-solving process
136.
A client who has been institutionalized for a long time would
like to move to supportive housing. The parents, who are his legal
guardians, are hesitant, but want the client to be happy. All
477
agree that finding housing near the parents would be optimal. In
order to determine the ability to honor the client’s request at this
time, the social worker should FIRST:
A. Meet with the client to determine his preferences for housing
types and supports
B. Identify the intensity and scope of the client’s service needs
C. Discuss with the parents any concerns that they may have about
the client moving
137. A social worker is charged with designing and implementing a
parent education program for those who have recently left welfare
and are returning back to work. Which of the following delivery
methods will likely be MOST effective for learning?
A. Short videos to be accessed via social media
B. Individual lectures with opportunities for question and answer
C. Interactive educational exercises with group discussion
138. A social worker in private practice receives a subpoena for
records of a client who left services over a month ago. The social
665
worker has had no contact with the client since termination. In
order to handle this situation appropriately, the social worker
should FIRST:
A. Send a letter stating that the client is no longer receiving services
B. Seek legal counsel to determine whether disclosure is required
C. Contact the client to discuss authorization to release the
requested information
139. When engaging in structural family therapy, which of the following
is MOST important for a social worker to remember to assist
families in making changes?
A. Families often need social workers to assume an authoritarian
role to make needed changes
B. Reinforcement of positive interactions leads to better role
definitions within families
C. Not all family interactions are easily amenable to change so
treatment may need to be long term
140. A social worker learns that a client is prescribed disulfiram
(Antabuse). Based on this prescription, which of the following is
MOST likely the client’s diagnosis?
A. Alcohol use disorder
B. Bipolar disorder
C. Major depressive disorder
141. During a session with a client, a social worker asks the client how
life would be different if the problem did not exist. In what part of
the problem-solving process will the response be MOST helpful?
A. Planning
B. Intervention
C. Assessment
1
4
2.
478
666
A social worker is interested in examining why some youth leaving
the detention center never reoffend despite extreme adversity. The
social worker is in contact with many former clients and has
obtained authorization to engage in a research study. Which of the
following data collection techniques will be MOST effective?
A. Focus groups with those who have not reoffended
B. Surveys of those who have reoffended and not reoffended
C. Semi-structured interviews with those who have not reoffended
143. A social worker is conducting an evaluation to assess the
effectiveness of an agency intervention. The social worker collects
baseline data and then randomly assigns clients to a group which
receives the service and one that does not. After several weeks,
the social work readministers the same assessment. Which of the
following types of evaluation designs is the social worker
employing?
A. Quasi-experimental
B. Cohort
C. Experimental
144. A social worker gets a referral for a client with schizoid personality
disorder. Based on this diagnosis, which of the following
symptoms can the social worker expect the client to exhibit?
A. Resentfulness that results in explosive anger
B. Lack guilt over harm to others
C. Limited emotional expression
145. A social worker in private practice has started a website for the
general public that provides useful suggested strategies for
addressing mental health issues such as anxiety, depression, and
fear. Which of the following issues is MOST important to consider
when the social worker provides this information?
A. Dual relationships will likely emerge because some of the people
who read the site may be people that the social worker knows
B. The social worker is not a specialist in all these areas so the
information may not be up-to-date and current
667
C. Readers may take this information as treatment
recommendations without proper assessment of their individual
problems
146. A social worker believes that those with mental health diagnoses
are more likely to be justice involved. Representative data
obtained by the social worker confirms a correlation, so the social
worker concludes that mental health conditions cause justice
involvement. Which is the MOST significant threat to internal
validity with regard to reaching this conclusion?
A. Other variables that explain both having mental health diagnoses
and being justice involved need to be eliminated
B. The types of client mental health diagnoses have to be identified
and controlled
C. The hypothesis needs to be tested on a larger and more diverse
group of clients with varied mental health conditions
1
4
7.
479
A social worker recommends that a 19-year-old client play a high-
action simulated martial arts video game that he likes to release
aggression and tension. Which of the following psychological
concepts is this recommendation based?
A. Catharsis
B. Harm reduction
C. Transference
148. A social worker receives a doctorate in literature (PhD) after
receiving her social work degree. On her social work business
cards, she lists her social work degree and license, as well as
uses the title “Dr.” in front of her name. According to ethical
standards, which BEST describes the actions of the social
worker?
A. Unethical as clients are likely to assume that her doctorate is in
social work
B. Ethical as she has not listed the literature degree, but only used
668
the appropriate title
C. Ethical as she has earned all of the degrees listed on her
business card
149. A social worker notices a change in the appearance of a client
with dementia who lives alone. The client appears dirty and
unshaven but is evasive when asked about his daily hygiene
routine. Which of the following is MOST likely the reason for his
appearance?
A. Physical abuse
B. Exploitation
C. Self-neglect
150. A client, who is a mother, tells a social worker that she is
concerned as her 5-year-old son exposed himself while on the bus
going to school. He also was pretending that his penis was a gun
while playing with his siblings at home. In order to BEST assist,
the social worker should:
A. Inform the mother that many children exhibit similar behavior
B. Identify the contexts in which these incidents with the child
occurred
C. Explain the psychosexual stages of child development to the
mother
151. Which of the following parenting styles is the BEST predictor of
positive outcomes for children?
A. Permissive
B. Authoritative
C. Authoritarian
152. A social worker in a community housing agency is working with a
client who has an ongoing dispute with a landlord. The dispute is
focused on the client’s responsibility to pay the rent during
extensive renovations to the apartment building. The client and
landlord agree to have the matter handled by an appointee of the
669
court who will make a binding determination. Which legal process
is being used to resolve this issue?
A. Pretrial intervention
B. Mediation
C. Arbitration
1
480
5
3.
A social worker is working with a couple that is in the process of a
high conflict divorce. When intervening with the couple, which of
the following roles will the social worker MOST likely assume?
A. Broker
B. Resource allocator
C. Mediator
154. An oncology social worker finds that family members often have a
lot of anger and fear related to client’s cancer diagnoses. The
social worker decides to start a group for family members to
attend. Based on the social worker’s assessment of need, which
of the following will MOST likely be the focus of the group’s
goals?
A. Education
B. Socialization
C. Emotional support
155. A school social worker is providing an educational workshop for
teachers in the school. One of the teachers expresses frustration
as students often challenge rules, questioning “what is in it for
them.” They report that students seem to respond well to rewards
for good behavior but fail to recognize that good behavior is
needed to have a productive learning environment. Which of the
following levels of moral development should the social worker
discuss to help the teacher understand student behavior?
A. Postconventional
B. Conventional
670
C. Preconventional
156. A client comes to a social worker after the death of his wife of 32
years. Despite the social worker asking about his present coping,
the client continues to speak about events that happened in the
past. The social worker gets frustrated and annoyed. To address
this situation, the social worker should:
A. Remind the client about the importance of speaking about his
current feelings
B. Acknowledge that discussing past recollections must be
important to the client in some way
C. Facilitate discussions about the past so the social worker can
learn more about the wife
157. When making which of the following decisions would analyses on
cost-effectiveness of interventions be MOST important?
A. Deciding the target populations to receive target treatments
B. Selecting between comparable treatment alternatives
C. Identifying funding needed to appropriately provide required
treatments
158. The MOST important aim of enactments in structural family
therapy is to:
A. Root the change effort in the relationships between family
members
481
Help engage family members in the problem-solving process
B.
C. Assist family members with practicing learned skills prior to
termination
159. Which of the following is the MOST significant limitation of using
results from a single subject design to inform social work practice?
A. External validity
B. Internal validity
C. Instrumentation
671
160. A social worker in an agency learns of a breach of confidential
information related to a client. The social worker reports the issue
to a supervisor who is not a social worker. In order to address the
issue ethically, the social worker should NEXT:
A. Discuss the issue with a clinical social work supervisor to
determine an appropriate course of action
B. Notify the client about the nature and extent of the confidential
information released
C. Seek legal consultation which may involve notifying the social
worker’s malpractice insurance carrier
161. During an initial meeting with a client who has suffered traumatic
loss, a social worker states to the client, “I have hope that you will
find some peace over time that will replace some of the pain that
you are currently feeling.” The social worker is MOST likely
making this statement to:
A. Help motivate the client to continue services in the future
B. Build the therapeutic alliance between the client and social
worker
C. Suggest that the client can have better life quality than is
experienced now
162. A social worker is receiving clinical supervision from a supervisor
in another division of an agency serving clients who have criminal
justice involvement. The social worker asks the supervisor to
assist with helping locate resources for a client who is moving into
a new apartment. During a supervision session, the clinical
supervisor mentions that she researched the past criminal history
of the client and wants to discuss it so the social worker can better
understand the client’s situation. In this situation, the social worker
should:
A. Listen attentively so that the information can be used in care
planning
B. Inform the supervisor that client consent should have been
obtained to access this information
C. Ask the supervisor how this history impacts the client’s upcoming
672
move
163. Before social workers disclose information about their own lives to
clients, which of the following questions is MOST important to ask
themselves?
A. “How much personal information should be revealed without
crossing boundaries?”
B. “Whose needs are being met by the personal disclosure?”
C. “Is the treatment being provided different from that provided to
others in any other way?”
1
6
4.
482
A social worker in an agency feels remorse because she witnessed
and failed to intervene when witnessing behavior that caused moral
injury to a client. Which of the following will likely be MOST
effective in helping the social worker address the feelings?
A. In-depth supervision provided to the social worker to address
ethical responsibilities to clients
B. A real or imagined apology by the social worker to the client for
the act of omission
C. Reparation by the agency to compensate the client for any
trauma caused by the incident
165. A social worker is working with a pregnant client who is actively
using opioids. The client is very worried about the health of her
baby and has decided that she would like to stop using these
drugs. In order to assist the client, the social worker should
FIRST:
A. Identify a medication assisted treatment provider for the client
B. Recommend that the client withdraw or abstain from opioids as
soon as possible
C. Refer the client to a physician knowledgeable about perinatal
addiction
673
166. When conducting a mental status exam, which of the following
statements BEST describes the extent to which a client’s cultural
background should be considered?
A. The social worker should determine a client’s cultural identity
when making all assessments
B. The role of culture should not be considered to ensure consistent
assessment across diverse groups
C. The influences of a client’s cultural identity on all behaviors and
thought patterns must be considered
167. In social work practice, which of the following is associated with
strong ego strength in clients?
A. Fantasies
B. Wishful thinking
C. Emotional regulation
168. A social worker gets a referral for a 20-year-old college student
who deliberately engaged in social isolation due to beliefs that
others are “out to get him.” After the behavior persists for three
weeks, the client is prescribed antipsychotic medication and
appears to be functioning typically. Which of the following is the
BEST diagnosis for this client?
A. Brief psychotic disorder
B. Schizophreniform disorder
C. Schizophrenia
169. A social worker discovers a breach of client confidentiality has
occurred. Which of the following will be MOST helpful in guiding
the social worker’s actions?
A. Review of ethical and legal standards on confidentiality breaches
483
Conversations with the client involved in the situation
B.
C. Consultation with a supervisor
170. A social worker is working in a community that has been
674
marginalized. The social worker finds that members of the
community have absorbed negative messages that limit their
views about their ability to achieve. Which of the following BEST
defines these internalized oppressive thoughts?
A. Direct power blocks
B. Indirect power blocks
C. Magical thinking
675
Full-Length Practice Test
Answers
449
1. B.Family courts increasingly order psychotherapy to resolve
issues of alienation and estrangement between parents and
children. Reunification therapy is a clinical intervention intended
to unite estranged children and parents. There are many
considerations when doing this type of treatment. The safety of
children should be paramount as a lack of understanding about
whether reunification is warranted may result in harm. All of the
incorrect response choices should be considered, but children’s
needs are most important.
Question Assesses
Psychotherapy, Clinical Interventions, and Case Management
2. B. Several theories have been proposed as to why adolescents
engage in risky behaviors. One theory stresses the need for
excitement, fun, and novel, intense sensations that override the
potential dangers involved in a particular activity. Another theory
stresses that many of these risk behaviors occur in a group
context and involve peer acceptance and status in the group. A
third theory emphasizes that adolescent risk taking is a form of
modeling and romanticizing adult behavior. In other words,
adolescents engage in some behaviors to identify with their
parents and other adults. Larger social networks does not place a
youth at greater risk. Also, risk-taking behavior occurs outside of
relationships so romanticization of harmful behaviors is also not
the greatest risk.
676
Question Assesses
Human Development, Diversity, and Behavior in the
Environment
3. A. Diagnoses of acute stress disorder (ASD) and post-traumatic
stress disorder (PTSD) are based on a history of exposure to
severely frightening and horrifying trauma followed by
reexperiencing, emotional numbing, and hyperarousal. These
symptoms must be severe enough to cause impairment or
distress. Symptoms lasting ≥3 days and <1 month are considered
ASD. Symptoms lasting >1 month are considered PTSD, which
can be a continuation of ASD or may manifest up to 6 months
after the trauma. Inability to function after exposure to trauma
does not equate to poor coping skills. Also, there is no indication
that the memories of the event are repressed or forgotten, only
that they are no longer negative or troubling.
Question Assesses
Assessment, Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning
4. A. There are key foci in adolescence—independence, self-image,
and peer relationships. Identity is also critical. The move for
independence creates the largest amount of distress for parents.
Early adolescents begin to pull away from their parents and show
less interest in family activities. Adolescents become aware of
their physical development. Most early adolescents are not sure
initially what to think of the changes in their body and
accompanying hygienic responsibilities. They become more
comfortable by the end of adolescence. Peers become extremely
important. As children pull away from their family, early
adolescents are not strong enough to stand on their own and they
turn to their peers for guidance and support.
Recognizing the complexity in intimate relationships usually
does not occur until early adulthood—Erikson’s next
psychosocial stage (intimacy vs. isolation) and movement from
677
egocentric to altruistic is most closely related to Erikson’s stage
of generativity versus stagnation.
Question Assesses
Human Development, Diversity, and Behavior in the
Environment
5. A. Social workers use a person-in-environment perspective and
recognize the importance of the external environment or context.
Thus, social workers should guard against viewing resilience from
an individual framework. Instead, resilience should be seen as a
function of developmental experiences that are grounded in a
community context. Whether a community is able to offer the
relationships, resources, and commitment needed to provide the
kinds of supports and developmental experiences that produce
resilient youth depends on many factors, but primary is whether
the needs of youth are given priority by all those which interact
with these adolescents.
Question Assesses
Human Development, Diversity, and Behavior in the
Environment
6. B. Persistent depressive disorder (PDD), a psychiatric disorder,
was originally known as dysthymia and chronic major depression.
PDD involves fewer symptoms but they last longer, at least 2
years. Major depressive disorder (MDD) can be diagnosed if
symptoms last for 2 weeks. Both mood disorders are serious.
Sometimes PDD can be more disruptive, even with fewer
symptoms. Those with PDD have at least two of the following
symptoms, along with a depressed mood: loss of appetite or
overeating; problems sleeping; low energy or tiredness; low self-
esteem; difficulty concentrating or making decisions; or feelings of
hopelessness. The symptoms will persist for at least 2 years
without much relief.
678
Those with MDD will have more symptoms, at least five of the
following: depressed mood; loss of interest or pleasure in many
or all activities; sleep problems; noticeable weight loss or gain;
faster or slower movements that others notice; tiredness or low
energy; problems thinking or making decisions; thoughts of guilt
or worthlessness; or repeated thoughts of death or suicide, or a
suicide attempt. They will last at least 2 weeks. Some are like
dysthymia symptoms. But they may be worse. There is no
indication that the client has low self-esteem.
7. C. A school social worker has a unique role in most schools and
may encounter issues that are not explicit in the policies and
procedures of the school. Obtaining a copy of policies and
procedures does not mean that they were read by the social
worker. The supervisor of the social worker may not be another
social worker and can be unfamiliar with the ethical/legal issues in
the profession. Arranging a meeting with a supervisor also does
not mean that it has already occurred. Social workers should be
well versed in confidentiality laws within their states or
jurisdictions as they are not consistent.
Question Assesses
Professional Values and Ethics
8. B. The duration of symptoms is what differentiates
schizophreniform disorder from schizophrenia. Schizophreniform
disorder symptoms last no longer than 6 months, while
schizophrenia is a lifelong condition. If the symptoms do not
improve, the diagnosis is schizophrenia, which is a lifelong
illness. Most individuals with schizophreniform disorder are
eventually diagnosed with schizophrenia.
Question Assesses
Assessment, Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning
9.
679
A. Critical race theory posits that racism should not be viewed as
an individual issue, but rather that it is a willful, institutionalized,
and dehumanizing system that is systemically memorialized in
policies and systems. Thus, modern business management
practices employed by corporations and nonprofits—creating
middle managers, performance management, productivity
analysis, and workforce planning—can all be traced back to the
management of plantation slavery. The incorrect response
choices focus on individual barriers and issues, but the correct
one transcends the professional relationship between social
worker and employee. Supervisors should also ensure that the
organizational policies are audited and understood within an
antiracist lens. Racism occurs on and is perpetuated by mezzo
and macro levels and systems, respectively, so it is MOST
important for the supervisor to remember this important principle.
Question Assesses
Human Development, Diversity, and Behavior in the
Environment
10. C. Social workers cannot communicate with one partner in a
couple as this creates a power dynamic within the therapeutic
relationship. If one partner translates for another, the social
worker gets information secondhand and is not able to hear
concerns of both partners directly. Social workers can accept
clients who speak other languages and do not have to refuse
referrals of these clients as long as qualified interpreters are
employed.
Question Assesses
Human Development, Diversity, and Behavior in the
Environment
11. A.The question contains a qualifying word—NEXT, indicating
that the order in which the responses occur is critical. There is
680
also no mention of school performance being an issue for any of
the children, besides truancy of the son, so requesting school
records is not needed. Assessment comes after engagement
and identifying and exploring are both assessment tasks. The
question mentions the son’s behavior as just one indication of
problems with family roles. The other children rarely speak and
comfort the mother who appears emotionally dependent. The
only response choice that mentions family roles is the correct
one as it is important to understand the expectations in order to
see if there are distorted views. Exploring the impact of the
son’s behavior may be more relevant once it is understood in
light of perception about his place within the family structure.
Question Assesses
Human Development, Diversity, and Behavior in the
Environment
12. B. A critical service component is helping clients understand
their problems. Understanding diagnoses can help clients
realize the pathology or causes of their behaviors and feelings,
as well as learn about treatment options and prognoses. Social
workers should not only discuss diagnoses with clients who ask
as clients may not understand their ability to inquire and will,
therefore, not have the benefit of learning about the causes of
their problems. Clients should always be fully informed of the
names of and rationales for their clinical diagnoses, but not
when knowing could cause harm. Social workers should always
adhere to the social work ethic of “do no harm.”
Question Assesses
Professional Values and Ethics
13. B. The question has a qualifying word—FIRST, meaning that
the order of the response choices is critical. Speaking to the
client about the impacts of not taking the medication and
suggesting a different medication will likely not be salient
681
reasons for the client to resume medication compliance and
certainly are not initial responses. Central to getting the client to
take his medication in the future is understanding the cause of
his resistance so that any barriers or challenges can be
addressed and removed.
Question Assesses
Assessment, Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning
14. B. Mind-body connection is the belief that the causes,
development and outcomes of a physical illness are determined
from the interaction of psychological, social factors and
biological factors. The impact of one system on another is BEST
supported by systems theory. Person-in-environment theory is
focused on the impacts of the environment on behavior which
does not directly speak to the mind-body connection.
Psychodynamic theory explores deeply rooted drives, needs
and desires as behavior is thought to be explained by
intrapsychic processes and interpersonal patterns outside
conscious awareness and based on childhood experiences.
Question Assesses
Psychotherapy, Clinical Interventions, and Case Management
15. B. All of the response choices focus on compensation linked to
staff recruitment and/or retention, but only the correct answer
increases pay due to desired performance (accepting more
referrals). A performance-based incentive plan clearly identifies
objectives and rewards staff financially for reaching these
performance indicators. There is no guarantee that
compensation focused on recruitment and/or retention will
actually “result in reducing client vacancies,” which is the goal,
without linking compensation to performance. The pay may not
be low for new employees but may cause turnover as
employees leave when they get experience.
682
Question Assesses
Psychotherapy, Clinical Interventions, and Case Management
16. C. The question specifically mentions that the client is the only
female in her computer programming courses. She also makes
a comment in the first sentence about the field not having “a
future” for her. Persistent messages about gender roles are
critical during adolescence. The correct answer assists the client
to expand her perception of who can be computer programmers.
The client may not even realize that her lack of motivation is
linked to gender stereotyping so exploring it will not be MOST
helpful. The problem in the question is rooted in her views
about computer programmers so college identification is not
relevant. Helping the client to see women who are working as
computer programmers is essential for the client to see herself
in one of these positions in the future.
Question Assesses
Psychotherapy, Clinical Interventions, and Case Management
17. B. Tokenization is the practice of making only a symbolic effort
to do a particular thing, especially by recruiting a small number
of people from underrepresented groups in order to give the
appearance of racial equality within a workforce. Not including
managers of color in decision-making is systematic
discrimination, but the question asked specifically about the
“hiring actions.” The hiring actions are BEST described as
tokenization as they symbolic rather than represent true
diversity in practices. Bigotry is having or expressing strong,
unreasonable beliefs and disliking other people who have
different beliefs or a different way of life.
Question Assesses
Psychotherapy, Clinical Interventions, and Case Management
683
18. B. A person who is “gender fluid” is flexible in regard to gender
identification. Gender can be seen as non-binary, meaning that
not all fit squarely into either traditional male or female
categories. Being gender fluid means not having a fixed gender
or place on the gender spectrum. The term is an
acknowledgment that there is a spectrum, and that gender is not
binary. Gender can change over time or depending on the
situation.
Question Assesses
Human Development, Diversity, and Behavior in the
Environment
19. B. Cyclothymic disorder is a chronic, fluctuating mood
disturbance characterized by hypomanic and depressive
symptoms that are distinct from one another. The hypomanic
and depressive symptoms are insufficient in number, severity,
pervasiveness, or duration to meet the full criteria for a
hypomanic or depressive episode. The current functioning of a
client with cyclothymic and bipolar I disorders may be
comparable, depending on the efficacy of
psychopharmacological treatment.
Question Assesses
Assessment, Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning
20. A. When the age of the client is mentioned in a question, it is
relevant. The initial sentence in the question states that the girl
is 14 years old, and the service is for adult women. The shelter
is not authorized to provide services and/or guardian permission
is needed. There is no information in the question that indicates
that the girl is legally emancipated from her parents. Since the
girl has no contact with them, parental permission will be
impossible. Even if the agency director says that she can be
served, it is not allowed. Thus, completing an intake assessment
684
is not appropriate since the shelter is not a viable service
provider. The social work needs to work with the girl to contact
the child protection agency as they will be the ones to
thoroughly assess the situation and get her any services
needed.
Question Assesses
Human Development, Diversity, and Behavior in the
Environment
21. B. Disruptive mood dysregulation disorder (DMDD) is a
condition in which children or adolescents experience ongoing
irritability, anger, and frequent, intense temper outbursts. The
symptomology and chronicity of symptoms in the question are
appropriate. However, the onset of symptoms must be before
age 10, and a DMDD diagnosis should not be made for the first
time before age 6 or after age 18.
Question Assesses
Assessment, Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning
22. B. The report by the client is provided during the first meeting
with a social worker. The client’s account may be accurate or an
indication of delusional thinking. There is not enough information
to make an accurate assessment so the response choices are
all assessment tasks. Determining whether the client’s feelings
stem from paranoia and the nature of the incidents is important
but cannot be understood without knowing more about the
client’s current functioning and history. Completing a
biopsychosocial evaluation will provide the context needed to
address the client’s concerns appropriately, so it needs to occur
before the other actions.
Question Assesses
Assessment, Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning
685
23. C. States or jurisdictions have the authority to regulate their
professionals. Social workers cannot practice in a state without
appropriate authority, even if it is done via electronic methods.
There is no uniform reciprocity between states and jurisdictions.
All states have regulations that govern practice—including the
provision of services using technology. The social worker will
need a regular or telehealth license in the state in which the
client is attending college if the type of service is regulated.
Question Assesses
Psychotherapy, Clinical Interventions, and Case Management
24. B. Stress can become toxic over time, affecting the way brains
and bodies grow. It can increase a person’s risk of developing
high blood pressure, elevating levels of inflammation that can
damage the arteries. These conditions can lead to heart
disease, stroke, and other serious health issues. Toxic stress
can make it harder for bodies to fight off infection and illness.
While toxic stress usually involves prolonged activation of the
stress response, an individual can have chronic stress that is
not toxic. Additionally, people can cope with events that are very
stressful but not experience toxic stress.
Question Assesses
Assessment, Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning
25. C. Naloxone is a life-saving medication used to rapidly reverse
opioid overdoses and can be given by intranasal spray (into the
nose), intramuscular (into the muscle), subcutaneous (under the
skin), or intravenous injection. Social workers should be trained
to administer naloxone as they often work with those at risk of
overdose. The question contains a qualifying word—NEXT.
Since the social worker has already contacted the authorities,
the medication should be administered as it can help save the
686
client’s life. The other response choices are not correct as they
do not address safety and can be done later, if appropriate.
Question Assesses
Human Development, Diversity, and Behavior in the
Environment
26. C. Program design is a description of the proposed intervention.
It addresses process and outcome objectives, timelines, plans
for collaboration, evaluation methods, and staffing needs.
Planning is driven by assessment findings so the needs
assessment will be critical to program design. A needs
assessment is an appraisal to determine what services are
lacking. It provides information required to prioritize goals. If it is
not central to program design, new services may be ineffective.
Question Assesses
Psychotherapy, Clinical Interventions, and Case Management
27. A. The question indicates that the client’s depression, anxiety,
and isolation are rooted in housing instability. The social worker
can BEST assist by helping the client get stable housing. As the
client is financially unsecure, there is the possibility of means-
tested assistance, but it will require producing fiscal records and
asset verification. This goal should be primary. The client’s
emotional state is situational according to the question so
should not be a primary focus as it will improve once stable
housing is secured. The question does not mention that another
job is desired or even realistic, so a job search is not advisable.
Question Assesses
Psychotherapy, Clinical Interventions, and Case Management
28. C. Those with antisocial personality disorder do not have
difficulty starting tasks or working independently and have a
687
sense of superiority. They have deeply ingrained, and rigid
dysfunctional thought process focused on social irresponsibility
with exploitive, delinquent, and criminal behavior with no
remorse.
Question Assesses
Assessment, Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning
29. A. Teletherapy often allows social workers to be able to observe
clients in their “natural” environments. The ability to visualize the
context in which clients live and/or work is very helpful in
understanding their life situations. Social workers should never
ignore client behaviors as the distraction is presented in the
question as a potential barrier to treatment and perhaps
resulting from concerns about what is happening in her
surroundings. If the client had a more private location and
desired to use it, the client would not be seeing the social
worker with the described distractions. The client may want the
social worker to directly observe her home life or has no private
space. Thus, requesting the client to find a private place is not
BEST. The client’s presenting problem and the need for coping
skills are unknown so suggesting ways to deal with stressors
may not be appropriate. Acknowledging the distractions and
helping the client to understand their impact are essential as the
social worker has valuable information about the family unit and
living arrangement which should be incorporated into the
helping process.
Question Assesses
Assessment, Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning
30. B. Epidemiology is the study of how often diseases occur in
different groups of people and why. Epidemiological information
is used to plan and evaluate strategies to prevent illness and as
a guide to the management of patients in whom disease has
already developed. Experimental research is a study that strictly
688
adheres to a scientific research design as it focuses on
explanation or cause/effect.
Question Assesses
Assessment, Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning
31. A. The social worker has to determine the daily mental status of
those with psychotic disorders. It will likely not be possible to
identify delusional or hallucinating clients by observing them as
their thought processes will be unknown. Self-reporting has poor
validity as clients may not disclose, or even recognize, their
symptoms. The best method of data collection is interviewing
clients.
Question Assesses
Assessment, Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning
32. A. The question provides information about the difficulty that the
client is having—expressing her emotions and interests—as well
as the reason that the problem exists—her rape as a child. The
goal is also stated as her desire to have more friends. All the
response choices are important, but the question asks for what
would be BEST when assisting the client. There is no mention
that she does not understand the impacts of her past trauma.
The issue is not that she does not meet others socially but she
has difficulty with others getting to know her and expressing her
emotions so modeling social interactions would be helpful in
shaping the desired behaviors.
Question Assesses
Psychotherapy, Clinical Interventions, and Case Management
33. A. Self-determination, the right to make one’s own decisions
and be treated with respect, is at the heart of both social work
and motivational interviewing. Motivational interviewing
689
addresses ambivalence, which needs to be resolved for
behavior change to occur. It also focuses in on and amplifies
change talk to take the focus away from the areas where a
person is arguing to stay the same. Thus, it helps clients make
different decisions in their lives which is linked to freedom to
choose.
Question Assesses
Professional Values and Ethics
34. B. A mobilizer identifies and convenes community members
and resources and makes them responsive to unmet community
needs. According to the question, there is a need to drive
change within the community and bring citizens together to
engage in planning. In an advocacy role, social workers fight for
the rights of others, especially those who are marginalized and
oppressed—which was not mentioned in the question. Brokering
is the process of making referrals to link clients to needed
resources. Again, this question does not concern existing
service delivery.
Question Assesses
Psychotherapy, Clinical Interventions, and Case Management
35. C. The racial diversity within the organization is quite good,
indicating that recruitment efforts are sufficient. There is no
indication that people of color are not seeking management
positions or want promotion. It is likely that there is institutional
racism in the policies and practices of the organization that have
been perpetuated over time.
Question Assesses
Human Development, Diversity, and Behavior in the
Environment
690
36. B. The behavioral symptoms of autism spectrum disorder (ASD)
often appear early in development. Many children show
symptoms of autism by 12 months to 18 months of age or
earlier. While some are diagnosed later, these diagnoses are
delayed because parents or providers may ignore the early
symptoms. Research shows that early detection and early
intervention greatly improve outcomes, so it is important to look
for these symptoms when a child is as young as possible. This
question asks for the answer to be “based on the onset of
symptoms” that are present in early childhood.
Question Assesses
Assessment, Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning
37. A. The question states that the managed care company is
asking for information “to support the assessment.” The
company is questioning its accuracy or validity. The records
requested focus on the assessment, not treatment planning or
intervention. The prognosis for treatment is unknown at this
time. Managed care companies are always concerned with cost.
However, the question does not mention cost and cost cannot
be determined simply by a client’s diagnosis.
Question Assesses
Assessment, Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning
38. A. Obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) does not damage
personal relationships. Obsessive-compulsive personality
disorder (OCPD) drastically impacts interpersonal relationships,
to their detriment so examination of personal relationships would
be helpful. Clients with both diagnoses will be distressed as
these disorders interfere with a person’s thoughts, feelings,
and/or actions so this symptom is not helpful when making a
differential diagnosis. Past treatment history is not relevant to
distinguishing between these disorders.
691
Question Assesses
Assessment, Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning
39. B. The question describes the presence of auditory
hallucinations as he believes that someone is speaking “to him
through the device.” Additionally, he appears paranoid about
being robbed, believing that others are spying on him. The
question has a qualifying word—FIRST—which indicates that
the order is important. Assuring the client that he is not in
danger will be ineffective as he believes that he is, and the
social worker has no additional information to alleviate his fears.
The client may be delusional or hallucinating so determining the
presence of psychosis is an important first step. Often psychotic
disorders, such as schizophrenia, emerge in early adulthood
which is why the age of the client was included in the question.
The presence or absence of past similar experiences does not
impact the client’s current beliefs that are the basis of the
presenting problem.
Question Assesses
Assessment, Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning
40. B. Answering this question correctly requires knowledge about
psychoanalytic theory. Dreams represent wish fulfillment,
unconscious desires, and conflicts. Dreams contain both
manifest and latent content. Manifest content includes
information from the dream as it is remembered. Latent content
represents the repressed, symbolic meaning embedded within
the dream. During dream analysis, the client shares the
manifest content of the dream. After specific symbols are pulled
from the manifest content, a social worker utilizes free
association to facilitate the exploration of repressed material.
Question Assesses
692
Human Development, Diversity, and Behavior in the
Environment
41. A. Barbiturates were extremely popular to treat seizures,
anxiety, and insomnia, but many doctors stopped using them
when misuse and overdoses increased over time. However,
barbiturates are still being misused today. Barbiturate withdrawal
can be very severe or even deadly. The question states that the
client is a long-time barbiturate user. Thus, it is critical for the
client to go through medical detoxification. During medical
detoxification, a client’s dosage of barbiturates can be gradually
tapered down.
Question Assesses
Human Development, Diversity, and Behavior in the
Environment
42. C. The presenting problem in the client’s feeling of being alone
and hopelessness which would not be addressed by medication
assisted treatment intervention. The client may need such
medication to assist with the biological aspects of the addiction,
but that is not the focus of the question, and the nature of the
addicted substances is unknown. Group therapy is helpful, but
the question mentions that the client is worried about
confidentiality and confidentiality cannot be guaranteed in
groups, making group therapy less desirable for this client
though it is effective for the problem. The remaining response
choice, individual therapy, would be the correct treatment
recommendation for this client given the circumstances.
Question Assesses
Psychotherapy, Clinical Interventions, and Case Management
43. C. In the United States, there are no federal surrogacy laws so
recommending the couple to review them is irrelevant. Though
693
the United States is one of the few countries to permit
commercial surrogacy, the laws vary considerably state to state
so helping to educate the couple on the laws that apply to them
is important. Some states have comprehensive surrogacy laws,
others are completely silent on the subject. While providing
reassurance may be helpful, it is not the BEST response as the
question states that their nervousness is fueled by their lack of
knowledge about the rights of all parties and not knowing the
answers to questions asked. Providing reassurance will not give
them the information needed to address the root cause of the
problem that will be alleviated with more factual information.
Question Assesses
Psychotherapy, Clinical Interventions, and Case Management
44. A. The first sentence of the question states that the social
worker obtained consent for treatment from the parent. Thus,
the girl is under the age of consent for this service in this
state/jurisdiction. The age of consent varies across
states/jurisdictions and type of treatment. After age 18, youth
automatically become adults legally and consent for their own
treatment. The parent is the consenting party so has access to
the record unless there is some compelling professional reason
why such release should not occur. No such reason is stated in
the question. Asking the client whether to release the record is
incorrect as the client is under the age of consent and not legally
able to make that decision. Refusing a copy of the record is also
incorrect as the parent is the consenting legal representative.
Question Assesses
Professional Values and Ethics
45. B. Eating with a client or accepting food from a client does not
always jeopardize the boundaries associated with professional
roles. In this question, there is no mention that the client is
confused about the role of the social worker or trying to test
694
boundaries. Asking the client about the nature of the request
may be culturally offensive as it is clear in the question that food
is used as a way of connecting with others. The social worker
should taste the food as it is central to the client’s culture.
Question Assesses
Professional Values and Ethics
46. A. The records should have been disposed of according to the
agency policy, but this did not occur. As the social worker has a
copy of the assessment, it should be provided to the client, but
the client should be aware that it was not appropriately
destroyed. Informing the client of the lack of compliance is
important as records that are 7 years old may not be available in
the future. It would not be appropriate to deny the request as the
records are still available. The reason for the request is not
required for record release. Clients always are allowed copies of
their records unless social workers feel that releasing this
information would cause harm, which is not the situation in this
question.
Question Assesses
Professional Values and Ethics
47. C. The presenting problem is that the client is missing
appointments due to his work schedule and does not have
access to remote services. Suggesting that he wait until he has
a computer will not provide him with needed services
immediately. The employment of the client is critical as it is clear
that the client does not have disposable income since he cannot
afford a computer. Thus, suggesting possible accommodation
by the employer is not likely and may negatively impact on his
job as it is assumed that the client would not be cancelling if it
were possible to attend. The lack of access to services is critical
and this client does not have the same resources as others.
Advocacy is the best way to meet the client’s needs so that he
695
can participate remotely like those with more means. None of
the other response choices will help with getting him a computer
as soon as possible.
Question Assesses
Psychotherapy, Clinical Interventions, and Case Management
48. B. Asking clients during the first session to designate which
documents can be released to which third parties is not best
practice as clients do not get to review the documents and may
not be informed of what and when information is being
disclosed. The same is true of obtaining consent at intake and
yearly thereafter. Having clients look at each document and
request separately provides maximum control and decision-
making by clients.
Question Assesses
Professional Values and Ethics
49. C. The question is asking what the social worker should focus
on “to help the parents cope with the loss of their child.”
Education about the stages of mourning will not facilitate
“coping” which is the goal of intervention. The social worker is
supposed to help the parents process the loss. Referring the
parents to a support group will result in the group being the
agent of change—not the social worker.
Question Assesses
Psychotherapy, Clinical Interventions, and Case Management
50. A. Bowen referred to general ideas about sibling position in
families when developing his family theory. Sibling position in
one’s family of origin is considered a major determining
influence on differentiation of self and on vulnerability to family
projection and multigenerational transmission. Functioning given
696
sibling position strongly influences the probability of becoming
emotionally trapped in a family.
This question requires recall of Bowen’s work, but the response
choices can be narrowed down when realizing that Bowen
focused on families and the only response choice that relates to
families is the correct answer.
Question Assesses
Psychotherapy, Clinical Interventions, and Case Management
51. A. There are many ways of authentically responding, including
giving positive feedback, reacting to client comments, and
sharing feelings. Although social workers should be accepting of
clients, sometimes social workers experience justifiable feelings
of frustration, anger, or even hurt due to clients’ actions. Social
workers should only share these feelings if they can be shared
constructively and this sharing benefits clients. Social workers
need to ensure that all actions taken are intended to meet the
needs of clients and not their own. In the question, the social
worker is MOST likely engaging in authentic responding, using
sharing to help the client understand the importance of honesty
and strengthen the helping relationship. The shared feeling
concerns the client lying and is not related to being
nonjudgmental and confidentiality. Social workers should never
be the support systems of clients. They can be supportive and
help clients mobilize their own supports but clients will be
dependent upon social workers if they serve as support
systems. Thus, sharing feelings to reinforce that the social
worker is part of the support system is incorrect.
Question Assesses
Psychotherapy, Clinical Interventions, and Case Management
52. B. Word finding, the task requested of the client, is a great
method to assess the client’s cognitive abilities. Appearance is
697
directed at examination of apparent age, cleanliness and
grooming, hair/clothing style, and so forth. Speech focuses on
fluency, tone, volume, and so forth. While the client is asked to
name the clothing articles and will be speaking, the focus of the
request is to determine how many can be named in the
designated time period. The qualifying word—MOST—is there
to assist with not focusing on the use of speech.
Question Assesses
Assessment, Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning
53. A. Preconventional morality is the first stage of moral
development. At the preconventional level, there is no personal
code of morality, and instead moral decisions are shaped by the
standards of others, usually adults, and the consequences of
following or breaking their rules. At the conventional level,
morality is tied to personal and societal relationships. At the
postconventional level, morality is defined in terms of more
abstract principles and values. There is now a belief that some
laws are unjust and should be changed or eliminated.
Question Assesses
Human Development, Diversity, and Behavior in the
Environment
54. B. The client is worried about expenses given her income so the
social worker needs to gather data that can assist with
developing a fiscal plan. Referring the client is an intervention
and not the FIRST action by the social worker as both
assessment and planning are needed prior to taking action.
Determining the nature of the employment changes may be part
of assessment but does not focus on the crux of the problem
which is paying monthly bills. Thus, this action can be done after
asking the client about her regular bills and expenses, if
appropriate.
698
Question Assesses
Assessment, Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning
55. B. Concurrent planning is a type of permanency planning in
which reunification services are provided at the same time that
alternative permanency plans are made for children, in the event
that reunification efforts fail. While concurrent planning is not
mandated in every jurisdiction, it is allowed and encouraged as
a way expedite permanency for children in the child welfare
system. In this question, the social worker is making long-term,
out-of-home arrangements for the child while simultaneously
strengthening the parenting skills and capacity of the parents to
increase the likelihood that the child can eventually return home.
Question Assesses
Psychotherapy, Clinical Interventions, and Case Management
56. A. While people handle grief differently, research indicates
strategies that assist when speaking with survivors of a death.
The client is eager to speak about the child and conversation
can provide a much-needed sense of normalcy at a time when
life seems anything but normal. An open exchange of firsthand
recollections, and their implied or overt expression(s) of why the
person mattered, often proves welcome and beneficial to the
bereaved and reinforces that the loved one lived a life worth
remembering.
In the question, ignoring the desire for the client to speak about
the child would not be “starting where the client is.” Simply
being sympathetic does not help to reengage the client. The
client may be coming to the social worker as the client needs
someone to be able to speak to about the child. Sometimes
friends and family members are reluctant to mention the
individual who has died for fear of triggering grief responses.
Question Assesses
699
Psychotherapy, Clinical Interventions, and Case Management
57. B. Social workers who have direct knowledge of a colleague’s
impairment due to personal problems or psychosocial distress
should consult with the colleague when feasible and assist the
colleague in taking remedial action. Thus, reporting the
concerns to a supervisor would not be done FIRST. Also,
documenting does not allow for immediate action to address the
negative consequences to client services. The question
mentions that the colleague is unaware of the impact of the grief
so speaking to the colleague directly is needed.
Question Assesses
Professional Values and Ethics
58. B. The question describes the client as being isolated, having
poor self-esteem, and enjoying few social relationships within
the context of school bullying. The behaviors and feelings of the
client are not the root cause of the problem. The problem lies in
the fear and discrimination against those who are transgender.
The lack of social and coping skills is not a cause, though
having them is a need of the client. The client is likely
experiencing psychosocial stress but it is also an effect rather
than a cause. The bullying and lack of friendships that are
causing isolation and poor self-esteem result from fear and
discrimination by others. This fear and discrimination are why
strong protections and policies need to be in place.
Question Assesses
Human Development, Diversity, and Behavior in the
Environment
59. C. An ecomap is a structural diagram of a client’s most
important relationships with people, groups, and organizations.
A genogram is a graphic portrayal of the composition and
700
structure of the client’s family. School records will focus on
academic progress—not the presence or intensity of his
friendships.
Question Assesses
Assessment, Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning
60. B. The answer must be chosen based on the client’s behavior.
Erikson spoke about adolescence as the period of transition
between childhood and adulthood. The question provided the
client’s age, indicating its importance in reasoning to arrive at
the correct answer. While the first sentence states that she has
sought counseling for depression, the behaviors that are the
focus of the question do not indicate mental health problems.
Additionally, there is no family or peer pressure mentioned. The
question mentions that client is “questioning” decisions and
engaging in new behaviors. These actions are more associated
with self-exploration and identity formation, the basis of
psychosocial development during late adolescence/early
adulthood.
Question Assesses
Human Development, Diversity, and Behavior in the
Environment
61. C. The question has a qualifying word—FIRST. Evaluating the
client for weight loss surgery is premature and should be done
by a physician due to the medical risks. The question mentions
that the client lives alone. The client may not have access to
nutritious healthy foods due to a social justice issue, such as
living in a food desert. The need for concrete services such as
transportation to stores with fresh foods comes before looking at
the weight as a social-emotional response according to
Maslow’s hierarchy of need.
Question Assesses
701
Human Development, Diversity, and Behavior in the
Environment
62. A. The question does not mention the health of the wife before
the onset of the husband’s Alzheimer’s disease. The context is
focused on the wife being the primary caregiver of the husband.
Based on the information in the question, degenerative disease
is not indicated. There are also no explicit signs of abuse by the
husband. Caregiving is associated with stress that can cause
these issues and has to be considered given the material in the
question.
Question Assesses
Human Development, Diversity, and Behavior in the
Environment
63. C. The first sentence provides important information about the
client and her method of communication. It is followed by a
sentence that indicates that the social worker is not able to use
this method proficiently. Communicating in writing or using basic
American Sign Language (ASL) is also not advised as the first
appointment is critical to engaging the client and gathering
information about why the client is seeking services. Not having
the ability to communicate fully with the client during the initial
meeting may inhibit the helping process in the future. The
meeting needs to be rescheduled so that a trained interpreter
can be identified and utilized.
Question Assesses
Human Development, Diversity, and Behavior in the
Environment
64. B. Exposure to racism has individual and system-level
implications. It is not the responsibility of a person of color to
educate White/Caucasian people about racism. Unfortunately,
702
this client has had to assume that responsibility. This experience
can have profound adverse impact on identity development.
There is no indication that the client is feeling isolated, and
marginalization and oppression occurs predominately by
systemic racism. The experience described in the question is
not positive, so it will likely not yield improved functioning or
better skills.
Question Assesses
Human Development, Diversity, and Behavior in the
Environment
65. B. The first sentence of the question indicates that the mother
and child are the clients. Seeing the daughter individually about
future custody is not advised as the daughter is not an individual
client and custody was not the original intent of treatment. The
social worker is not allowed to make child custody
recommendations as there is a conflict of interest as the social
worker is providing therapy to the mother and daughter. The
social worker cannot be a forensic expert and has never met the
father so is not aware of his capacity to parent. Thus, sending
the letter recommending joint custody is unethical as the social
worker has never assessed and has no relationship with the
father.
Question Assesses
Professional Values and Ethics
66. C. Moral distress results from the psychological and emotional
effects experienced when social workers and other helping
professionals feel institutional constraints block them from
operating in an manner perceived as right. Moral conflicts and
dilemmas related to limited resources are ever-present in the
daily work of social workers. Social workers should advocate for
adequate resources and working environments that are
consistent with professional ethical principles. Coping with poor
703
working conditions or changing positions does not address the
root cause of the problem, unjust or inadequate systems,
making them not the BEST ethical solutions.
Question Assesses
Professional Values and Ethics
67. A. This question describes a situation in which a social worker
would gain personally from a professional responsibility. It is not
appropriate for the social worker to use the points personally.
This specific situation may not be covered in human resource
policy or employment documents so review of them is not
critical. Additionally, even if actions are allowed by policy, they
may not be consistent with the ethical standards of the
profession. Even if another employee used the points for
personal use, the social worker should not. In order to handle
the situation ethically, the social worker should inform the
vendor that the reward points cannot be used personally. The
social worker has an unfair advantage over other employees
due to this job responsibility and should not use the task for
personal gain.
Question Assesses
Professional Values and Ethics
68. A. The couple’s decision is based on the belief that the child will
be born with disabilities. If the test yields a false positive then
the couple terminated a pregnancy for a child who would not
have disabilities. A false negative test result indicates that a
person does not have a specific disease or condition when the
person actually does have the disease or condition. Curvilinear
relationships are those that do not consistently follow an
increasing or decreasing pattern but rather change direction
over time. The nature of relationships does not apply to this
question.
704
Question Assesses
Assessment, Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning
69. B. The reason for the sleep disturbance has not been
determined so a comprehensive biopsychosocial assessment is
needed to identify any changes which may be the cause.
Complementary therapies are directed at treating the symptoms
—not the underlying reason for sleeplessness. While medication
from a physician may be helpful while the issue is being
identified, it is not the FIRST way for the social worker to assist.
Question Assesses
Assessment, Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning
70. C. Reversal designs are powerful methods for demonstrating
relationships between independent and dependent variables.
Thus, they can have good, not poor, internal validity. While there
are benefits to reversal designs (removing interventions to see
changes in dependent variables), there are also problems
associated with them. For example, many interventions cannot
be reversed, due to ethical reasons (involving self-injurious or
self-harm behavior) or practical reasons (they cannot be
unlearned). It may be unethical to end a treatment if it is
beneficial and related to health/safety. While external validity
(generalizability) is a concern of single-subject designs
generally, it is not a problem for reversal design specifically,
eliminating it from also being correct.
Question Assesses
Professional Values and Ethics
71. A. The question states that the social worker has no experience
working with the courts (i.e., forensic social work). The social
worker may be unclear as to whether there is a mandate to
appear before the court based on the notification provided.
705
There may be a need or perhaps the social worker can claim
privilege, but legal consultation is needed before writing to the
court. It is important to notify the client, but the client will likely
have questions about whether and what information is to be
released. Since the social worker is not knowledgeable about
forensic work, it would be best to become educated by an
attorney during consultation so that this information can
ultimately be provided to the client ultimately. The question
contains a qualifying word—FIRST—which means that the order
of the actions is critical.
Question Assesses
Professional Values and Ethics
72. B. When a student reaches 18 years of age or attends a
postsecondary institution, rights transfer from the parents to the
student. Law prohibits the improper disclosure of personally
identifiable information derived from education records without
the adult student’s permission. All universities need to follow the
law so policies cannot vary, and transcripts are not sent to
parents without permission even if they are paying for courses.
Question Assesses
Psychotherapy, Clinical Interventions, and Case Management
73. C. Criterion validity establishes whether the construct is
measured with accuracy by comparison one assessment with
other measures of the same construct. The consistency
between the rating and observed behavior increases confidence
that the rating scale is valid. Internal validity is related to cause-
effect relationships. Test-retest reliability concerns whether
administering the same assessment repeatedly will yield the
same result.
Question Assesses
706
Assessment, Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning
74. B. If intervention is not working, the social worker needs to
assess to see if other issues have emerged or if the original
determination of the root cause of the problem is incorrect. The
goals are based on the assessment so revising them will be
needed but is premature. There may be a need for consultation
or supervision, but the use of NEXT as a qualifying word in the
question makes this response choice incorrect. Again,
intervention is implementation of a treatment plan that is based
on assessment. If the intervention is not working, additional
information from the client is needed.
Question Assesses
Psychotherapy, Clinical Interventions, and Case Management
75. A. Safety is always paramount. If a social worker is concerned
about a client who has engaged in sexual offenses against a
minor reoffending, then access to potential victims must be
limited. Other response choices may be appropriate but are not
the MOST important in intervention as they do not directly relate
to safety of others.
Question Assesses
Human Development, Diversity, and Behavior in the
Environment
76. A. Malingering is falsification or profound exaggeration of illness
(physical or mental) to gain external benefits such as avoiding
work or responsibility, seeking drugs, avoiding trial (law),
seeking attention, avoiding military services, leave from school,
paid leave from a job, among others. Hypochondriacal is
abnormal anxiety about health, especially with an unwarranted
fear that one has a serious disease. Grandiose is being
707
impressive and imposing in appearance or style, especially
pretentiously so.
Question Assesses
Assessment, Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning
77. A. The allegation needs to be immediately reported to a
supervisor. All reports need investigation regardless of the
treatment history of the complainant. Allegations do not need to
be in writing. Only the correct answer ensures a timely report to
a responsible party.
Question Assesses
Human Development, Diversity, and Behavior in the
Environment
78. B. This information is privileged so the social worker should not
contact the authorities. There is no indication of danger to the
father in the question as the father is in good health. Treatment
should be focused on the client and her feelings of guilt and
relationship with her father. Goal setting is critical and should be
done FIRST as she reports difficulty “relating” to her father but
there is no information about what specifically is meant by this
concern or what needs to change.
Question Assesses
Assessment, Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning
79. C. While the social worker may not directly be friends with the
boss, the presence of this relationship can certainly impact
treatment. If the client learns of this relationship, it may erode
trust as the client may be thinking that the social worker was
hiding something. The decision to continue working together is
primarily the client’s choice—not the social worker’s decision.
Referring the client to another social worker may not be needed.
708
However, all conflicts of interest or potential conflicts of interest
should be discussed with the client when they emerge so a
mutually agreed upon solution can be determined.
Question Assesses
Professional Values and Ethics
80. C. This question describes an issue with which the social
worker must deal so disclosing it to the client is not appropriate.
Social workers are human and naturally may be triggered by
clients’ attitudes, behaviors, and experiences. Feelings by the
social worker should not drive treatment recommendations for
the client. Social workers do not give advice and the question
does not indicate that the client is interested in disclosing the
affair to her spouse.
Question Assesses
Professional Values and Ethics
81. B. Infidelity can involve an emotional connection and is not
necessarily sexual in nature. Emotional infidelity is equally
damaging and can lead to divorce. The age of the unfaithful
spouse is also not directly relevant. While most cultures are
disapproving of infidelity, divorce or ending a marriage is not
permitted in all cultures. Views about infidelity are also culturally
based so will have the MOST impact on whether the marriage
ends.
Question Assesses
Human Development, Diversity, and Behavior in the
Environment
82. C. Values clarification exercises are often used by social
workers to assist clients with gaining greater understanding of
what is important to them. Understanding their values helps
709
clients make decisions consistent with what makes them happy.
In this question, asking the client to identify what is important
with regard to future work will help him narrow down his new
major as he is unhappy with his current choice and unsure of his
career plans. The question is clear that the client wants to
change his area of study and has put ample thought into the
decision. The question does not state that he will be discussing
his career choice with his parents, only that they will be angry
with him. Also, the MOST pressing issue is identifying another
major. Informing his parents is secondary once a new major has
been selected. There is no indication that the client has difficulty
making independent decisions generally—only that his current
major was influenced by his parents.
Question Assesses
Psychotherapy, Clinical Interventions, and Case Management
83. C. Clarification is a useful interviewing technique that has many
purposes. The question includes the qualifying word MOST so
identifying the essential function is the root of what is being
asked. Interviewing is done for the betterment of the client.
Demonstrating that the social worker is listening is only useful
as it relates to enhancing client well-being, which is not
mentioned in this response choice. The social worker
understands what the client is explicitly saying, but the client is
expressing mixed emotions. The client is communicating clearly
but needs to process the varied feelings associated with this
transition. The social worker’s statement concerns feelings so
the answer must also be focused on affective responses.
Question Assesses
Psychotherapy, Clinical Interventions, and Case Management
84. A. While summarization usually occurs at the end of a meeting,
it can also be used midway through an interaction or even at the
beginning. At the start of a session, it is useful to summarize any
710
previous discussions as it can help to provide focus so there is
continuity in care. Treatment goals are not focused on the social
worker and should be mutually agreed upon by client and social
worker, making identifying the social worker’s treatment goals
incorrect. Additionally, summarizing specifically at the beginning
of a weekly meeting does not focus on enhancing client
understanding of progress as understanding progress can occur
at any time during meetings.
Question Assesses
Psychotherapy, Clinical Interventions, and Case Management
85. B. The social worker is asking a probing question that aims to
help the client think more critically about leaving his job. The
question does not focus on determining his coping skills or
assessing his emotional attachment. While the client may or
may not ultimately decide to leave his current employment,
understanding the barriers to leaving, which are called
restraining forces, are important. Until the restraining forces are
identified, little progress can be made to reduce them which is
why the social workers is posing the question.
Question Assesses
Psychotherapy, Clinical Interventions, and Case Management
86. C. Attending behaviors are verbal and non-verbal behaviors
displayed by a social worker throughout the problem-solving
process. Examples include referring to a client by name,
reframing, paraphrasing, maintaining eye contact (if culturally
appropriate), displaying facial expressions that express interest
and concern, nodding head to convey affirmation, and so forth.
Attending behaviors can be used to describe all actions while
attentively listening. Helpful attending behaviors, along with
active listening, are considered cornerstones of the therapeutic
alliance which is the major agent of change. They are not limited
to conveying empathy as they also focus on showing respect for
711
the client and increasing understanding of client problems.
Attending behaviors do not provide alternative viewpoints so this
response choice is not primary to their use.
Question Assesses
Psychotherapy, Clinical Interventions, and Case Management
87. A. Client questionnaires are surveys that help clients convey
personal information, such as address or age, past history, and
so forth. Social workers might complete assessment forms
during initial interviews to gather client information. Even when
asking standard questions, social workers should always appear
caring and use attending behaviors. Client intake forms can
contain close- and open-ended questions so they do not ignore
the value of open-ended inquiry. The use of standardized
intakes or assessments are not centered on client’s unique
problems and may fail to collect information that is relevant
while collecting material that is not germane to the presenting
issue.
Question Assesses
Assessment, Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning
88. A. The question concerns post-discharge follow up that occurs
subsequent to evaluation and termination. As the client has
been discharged, goal attainment has been achieved.
Maintaining that progress is critical to continued success. Not all
clients need after-care services, so it is not the BEST response.
Social workers should not be exploring the presence of other
issues or problems when telephoning clients.
Question Assesses
Psychotherapy, Clinical Interventions, and Case Management
89. B. Leading questions focus client responses on a particular
712
topic or area of interest. Examples of leading questions include
the following: “You travelled by taxi today, didn’t you?” or “You
mentioned that you were adopted, correct?” Leading questions
during assessment are not focused on treatment discussions.
Assessment precedes treatment and focuses on gathering
information. Social workers do not need to use leading
questions to determine client motivation, which can be assessed
verbally and nonverbally. They are leading as the social worker
wants to obtain information about a chosen subject or in a
specific area.
Question Assesses
Assessment, Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning
90. A. Infidelity can leave a partner feeling devastated, alone, and
betrayed. Individual counseling can help focus on forgiving,
letting go, or moving on. There are many ways to handle
feelings that come with infidelity. There is no indication that
there are ongoing problems in the relationship so couples
therapy is not needed. Mutual aid groups can be helpful for
isolation or addressing feelings that one is alone. However,
betrayal and anger are BEST handled individually.
Question Assesses
Psychotherapy, Clinical Interventions, and Case Management
91. C. Paradox questions are often a surprise for clients, but they
get them thinking about new ideas and possible solutions.
Paradox questions are a powerful tool whenever clients are
stuck, and old patterns or habits need to be replaced with new
ones. By understanding what could cause the relationship to
deteriorate further, the client, in the question, identifies what
needs to be addressed to make improvements. Paradoxical
questions are not used to assess listening or level of
commitment.
713
Question Assesses
Psychotherapy, Clinical Interventions, and Case Management
92. A. The context described in the question is the client focusing
on problems and feeling overwhelmed. The question posed by
the social worker is to help him focus on solutions—what can be
done rather than what can’t be done. The question assists with
steering the conversation in a positive direction. The social
worker’s question also affirms that the social worker is a helper,
but the social worker needs to address the presenting problem
which is that the client is not being solution focused. The client
is just starting to move to goal setting so specific expectations
are likely premature.
Question Assesses
Assessment, Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning
93. B. Double binds have been central to family therapy since its
earliest days. This example of a double bind is the parent giving
the message: “Be spontaneous” and then scolding the child
when doing so. If a child is subjected to this kind of
communication over a long period of time, it is easy to see how
confusion or erosion of confidence by a child can set in.
Metacommunication is the nonverbal cues (tone of voice, body
language, gestures, facial expression, etc.) that have meaning
but is not manifest. A feedback loop one in which outputs slow
down a process and preserve a stable state.
Question Assesses
Human Development, Diversity, and Behavior in the
Environment
94. A. Additional protection is provided to the client if psychotherapy
notes are kept separately from the client’s record.
Psychotherapy notes means communication documenting or
714
analyzing the contents of conversation during a private
counseling session. Psychotherapy notes excludes medication
prescription and monitoring, counseling session start and stop
times, the modalities and frequencies of treatment furnished,
results of clinical tests, and any summary of the following items:
diagnosis, functional status, the treatment plan, symptoms,
prognosis, and progress to date. They are private notes used by
the treating professional. Social workers should never skew their
documentation to include only positive content or not document
for fear of the need to release information.
Question Assesses
Professional Values and Ethics
95. B. Diverticulitis is inflammation (swelling) and infection in the
large intestine or colon characterized by pain, nausea, and
fever. It requires a high fiber diet, drinking plenty of water, and
exercise. Since the client will be living with his son, it is
important that they both know on-going care is needed that can
prevent problems in the future. Goal setting post discharge is
not MOST important. The client will get a summary of care when
leaving the hospital, but discharge planning is focused on the
future and preventing relapse—not reviewing the past.
Question Assesses
Assessment, Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning
96. C.Child abuse and neglect and parental mental health are
strongly associated. Though not all parents with mental health
issues abuse their children, maternal mental health is a
significant risk factor for child abuse, after controlling for poverty,
child’s intellectual disability and other variables. While all the
response choices may be relevant, the FIRST area that needs
further assessment is the mother’s mental health status as it is
the most salient to risk.
715
Question Assesses
Human Development, Diversity, and Behavior in the
Environment
97. A. Sliding scale fees are common in-service delivery and there
are many bases for determining their structure. Income can be
used but may not indicate the amount that a client can actually
afford to pay. For example, the client who is making more may
have a spouse who is not working due to childcare
responsibilities. This client may have less discretionary income
than a client without children. The ability to pay is distinct from
income and is a concern given expenses. All clients do not need
to pay the same fee. A client who is being seen pro bono or for
a reduced rate can be charged the full cost of services if
circumstances change. Thus, the fees can change during the
course of treatment. Changing fees is not an issue with using
sliding scale fees.
Question Assesses
Psychotherapy, Clinical Interventions, and Case Management
98. C. While both parents agreed to treatment of the daughter
initially, it is unknown if consent by both parents was needed.
Whether both parents have to consent will be stipulated in the
child custody agreement which needs to be consulted. The
social workers cannot meet with the daughter again if consent
by both parents is required. It would be premature to end
treatment, given its benefit, if the consent of only one parent is
needed. The correct response would be to contact the other
parent to determine the legal decision-making requirements per
the court order.
Question Assesses
Professional Values and Ethics
716
99. B. Vaccination is an important part of a public health program.
The goal of public health is to prevent disease. It is much easier
and more cost-effective to prevent a disease than to treat it.
Immunizations protect the person who is vaccinated from
serious diseases and also prevent the spread of those diseases
to others. The importance of her job to her is unknown but it is
likely that she is already aware that she may be fired if she is
deceitful, so it does not appear to be a salient motivator. There
are many people who are wary of the safety of vaccinations and
question their efficacy despite scientific evidence. The question
mentions that she lives with her children and parents. The well-
being of others is often a great motivator for clients to seek
treatment or change behaviors. Discussing the benefit of
vaccination to the well-being of her family is likely to be the
MOST important consideration for the client when making her
decision.
Question Assesses
Psychotherapy, Clinical Interventions, and Case Management
100. B. According to the question, the social worker is employed by
a child welfare agency that is charged with investigating this
allegation. It is not appropriate to interview all parties together
as it is not likely that the person(s) being hurt will feel
comfortable being honest in the presence of the perpetrator.
The children will be important sources of information, so they
need to be part of the inquiry. If domestic violence is occurring,
the perpetrator must be held accountable for actions taken and
understand that the behavior is wrong. Assuring all family
members that their actions are acceptable may inadvertently
send a message that abuse or violence against others is
acceptable. Speaking to each family member separately will
help the social worker better understand the situation and
protect the well-being of those who may be victimized.
Question Assesses
717
Assessment, Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning
101. B.Cognitive behavioral treatment is a psychological
intervention that is helpful with a wide range of disorders. It
helps clients change thinking patterns by learning to recognize
distortions in thinking that are creating problems, and then
reevaluating them in light of reality. Central to this approach is
gaining a better understanding of the behavior. In this question,
the client is journaling and has identified situations that invoke
unpleasant thoughts. The NEXT step is to identify negative
thinking that supports the initial thoughts and attempt to isolate
its root causes. Avoiding situations does not help with
modifying the client’s thinking. Determining the consequences
of the thoughts is needed, but only after the patterns and
causes are understood.
Question Assesses
Psychotherapy, Clinical Interventions, and Case Management
102. A.Scale questions are good tools to find out things that are
difficult to measure. Scale questions help to assess subjective
perceptions such as satisfaction, motivation, cognition,
impressions, feelings, progress, and anger. They become
measurable, helping the client to put feelings in perspective.
Their use does not enhance accuracy or encourage
discussion. In fact, they may limit discussion as clients need to
represent their emotions by a single number, without the ability
to explain in more depth their feelings. Pain is often assessed
using a scaling question as it is a quick way to assess intensity.
Question Assesses
Assessment, Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning
103. A.Social workers should not assume a client’s preferred
pronouns by appearance, name, and so forth. There are many
718
best practices for creating an inclusive environment for clients
such as avoiding specific gender markers if they are unknown
—for instance, asking, “How may I help you today?” When a
client’s preferred name or pronouns are unknown, it is also
good to politely ask, “I would like be respectful—how would
you like to be addressed?” or “What name and pronoun would
you like me to use?” In the question, the social worker used
the incorrect pronoun by accident so the social worker should
NEXT acknowledge the mistake and apologize by saying “I
apologize for using the wrong pronoun. I did not mean to
disrespect you.” Regardless of the reason, the social worker
has made a mistake. The problem is rooted in the social
worker’s action, so it is not the client’s responsibility to
understand why it occurred. The correction by the client did
take bravery, but having the social worker take accountability is
essential for a therapeutic alliance to be formed.
Question Assesses
Human Development, Diversity, and Behavior in the
Environment
104. C.There may be therapeutic reasons why clients must be in
certain settings for treatment. However, as such a reason is
not specified in the question and there is no indication that the
client has been informed that being in bed is inappropriate,
asking the client to move is not correct. It may be good for the
social worker to inquire the reason for lying in bed, but the
presenting problem is the uncomfortable feeling by the social
worker. While self-reflection may be a good first step, the
question is not asking about the order of the response choices,
rather what should be done. Acknowledging that the client is
exerting self-determination is important even if the other
response choices eventually do happen. The correct answer
has to occur while the others can but are not mandatory.
Question Assesses
719
Professional Values and Ethics
105. C.Social workers who are leaving employment settings should
inform clients of appropriate options for the continuation of
services. Social workers should review the benefits and risks
of each option. Social workers should not solicit clients when
leaving agencies and opening private practices, but likewise,
clients should have receiving services from such practices as
an option for continuity of treatment. Not being able to continue
to serve clients limits their treatment options and decision
making. Just because a policy is legal does not mean that it is
ethical so consulting an attorney is not helpful. The social
worker should ultimately not sign the document for this reason.
Question Assesses
Professional Values and Ethics
106. B.Social workers should avoid engaging in sexual
relationships with colleagues/coworkers when there is a
potential for a conflict of interest. It is assumed that the
relationship described in the question began without the
presence of or potential for a conflict. However, the promotion
of the social worker places her with supervisory responsibility
over her partner. The relationship should not remain secret,
whether the promotion is taken or not, as the agency needs to
ensure that potential conflicts do not occur now and in the
future. The social worker should not be the one to determine
the conflicts as judgment may be skewed by the relationship
and there is no transparency. The social worker should not
decline the promotion without stating the reason as the social
worker needs to be forthcoming with the employer. There may
be ways for the relationship to continue and the social worker
to be promoted but an appropriate plan cannot be developed
without informing the agency.
Question Assesses
720
Professional Values and Ethics
107. B.Quantitative methods have high reliability, but often lack
validity whereas qualitative methods have high validity, but low
reliability. Self-administered questionnaires are used in
quantitative research. Structured interviews mirror self-
administered questionnaires, but questions are asked by an
interviewer instead. They also are focused on reliability, which
is why questions are written out. Unstructured interviews allow
freedom for the interviewer to probe and to gather more in-
depth qualitative information on a chosen topic. They yield
qualitative data which will provide an in-depth understanding of
the area of concern (high validity).
Question Assesses
Assessment, Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning
108. A.People who are undocumented are likely to avoid routine
activities out of fear of immigration enforcement. Avoidance of
these activities are likely to experience psychological distress.
In addition to causing psychological distress, discriminatory
policies negatively impact undocumented immigrants access to
services and exercising of their rights. Social workers should
recognize these realities before assisting families. Given that
their life quality is negatively impacted, they likely see the
urgency, but their reluctance may be due to real issues
associated with potential deportation. If they are not willing to
speak to the landlord, the couple will certainly not stop paying
rent. The question contains a qualifying word—FIRST. Many of
the response choices may be the focus of the intervention, but
they have to be considered after recognizing the discrimination
against those who are undocumented which is a necessary
initial step.
Question Assesses
Assessment, Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning
721
109. C.Often those who are immigrants, undocumented, or
members of marginalized communities have negative
outcomes when interfacing with law enforcement. Instead of
seeing this woman’s behavior as a way to ask for assistance, it
may be viewed as endangering her children. Additionally, she
may be undocumented or have past unresolved legal matters
that can result in adverse outcomes for her and her children if
police are notified. The safety issue caused an ethical dilemma
for the social worker as something needed to be done to
prevent the family from being injured. However, the social
worker needs to be aware that laws often dictate actions that
adversely impact families. The rest of the response choices
are not the MOST pressing concern.
Question Assesses
Human Development, Diversity, and Behavior in the
Environment
110. B.The question describes the beliefs of the social worker’s
family and her own decisions about reproduction. However,
there is no indication that the social worker does not support
the self-determination of clients and have the ability to inform
clients about all options. The social worker should not decline
the position until after assessing the ability to fulfill the ethical
responsibilities associated with the job duties. The results of
this assessment will dictate the ultimate decision of whether to
work with the students. Disclosing personal beliefs is not
needed if they will not impact job performance and consistency
with ethical standards, not agency policy, is paramount.
Question Assesses
Professional Values and Ethics
111. B.Individuals who are a danger to self or others can, under
certain conditions, be court ordered to psychiatric hospitals.
722
This process is often referred to as involuntary commitment.
There is an attempt to only hospitalize individuals for a short
time until they can be stabilized so there should be no
assumption that the hospitalizations will be lengthy. The client
may not have been the aggressor in the incident described but
still may be a danger to self or others.
Question Assesses
Assessment, Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning
112. C.The question has a qualifying word—FIRST. It is necessary
for the social worker to understand the situation within a
cultural context. Such an assessment needs to include
exploring the cultural and family’s view of pregnancy, including
rituals or traditions surrounding the care of females who are
pregnant. The family may need assistance with financial and
food assistance, but this will not be known without listening
and learning by the worker. For example, the cupboards may
be bare as food may be grown or raised in the family’s
backyard. Additionally in this home, the family may follow the
Hmong tradition that a pregnant woman must live in another
place for 30 days, but after that time, she can return home.
The daughter’s age may have nothing to do with her needing
to leave the house. There is no indication of physical or sexual
abuse mentioned in the question.
Question Assesses
Human Development, Diversity, and Behavior in the
Environment
113. B.Sexual health is an important part of total health as sexual
problems can disrupt health, quality of life, and general well-
being, causing in many instances marital problems or marriage
dissolution, and emotional impoverishment. While clients may
be hesitant to talk about sexual issues, it is not the MOST
important reason for social workers to be educated in this area.
723
While discussing sexual health with clients may not be
necessary, understanding its impact on biopsychosocial
function is essential for all clients. Being knowledgeable about
sexual health is not just important for social workers
addressing issues related to sexual orientation.
Question Assesses
Human Development, Diversity, and Behavior in the
Environment
114. B.When social workers are working with clients who have the
same identified problems, there is a risk that individual
differences will not be considered, treatment will become rote,
and a “one size fits all” approach will emerge. Assessment and
treatment strategies should take into consideration client
circumstances even if presenting problems of clients are the
same. Social workers should always use evidence-based
practices. Burnout is not influenced by treating the clients with
the same identified problems. The MOST risk is a social
worker adopting a “seen that—done that” attitude which can
make the social worker less apt to determine important
differences between clients which need to be considered in the
problem-solving process.
Question Assesses
Psychotherapy, Clinical Interventions, and Case Management
115. B.The question contains a qualifying word—FIRST—so the
order of the social workers’ actions is critical. A medical
etiology should be ruled out before determining other social-
emotional causes. Self-doubt, rejection, and feelings of
inadequacy are common in those with sexual dysfunction,
which is the root cause of the problem. A primary care
physician can assist with performing a physical exam and
taking a medical history. Based on symptoms, more tests may
be ordered, and an oral medication can be prescribed. Social
724
workers and general medical practitioners should be versed in
dealing with problems associated with erectile dysfunction, so
specialists are usually not needed, at least not initially.
Question Assesses
Assessment, Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning
116. A.Social work practice should always be viewed from the
perspective of the client. Protecting the social worker and
agency are never the primary concern or motivator for practice
decisions. While creating a record of what services have been
provided is very useful, this response choice justifies
documentation only due to the chance that problems with re-
emerge, while many do not. Information needs to be readily
available to the client and social worker to evaluate the
effectiveness of services and ensure that appropriate treatment
decisions are made. The correct answer is the basis of
evidence-based decision making which is a critical component
of social work practice.
Question Assesses
Psychotherapy, Clinical Interventions, and Case Management
117. A.There are different forms of supervision. They include in-vivo
supervision in which the supervisor is in the room with the
supervisee and client. The supervisor does not engage in
direct therapy, but instead the supervisee consults with the
supervisor in the presence of the client. Another type
(sometimes referred to as “bug-in-the-ear”) is when a social
worker wears a wireless earphone to receive guidance. It can
be done while the supervisor watches the social worker behind
a one-way mirror which allows the supervisor to observe the
social workers’ interactions with clients as well.
Question Assesses
725
Psychotherapy, Clinical Interventions, and Case Management
118. B.There are many terms used to refer to documentation that a
social worker makes as a result of meeting with or monitoring
clients, including case notes, progress notes, progress
recordings, client log, and so forth. Often these documents are
used in supervision as they summarize the services that the
social worker has provided. The discussion of these notes in
supervision can create a productive and meaningful
supervisory environment. However, like other self-report
methods, it is dependent on the supervisee’s ability to
accurately observe interactions and occurrences. Clients
should always be asked to consent when discussing clients’
situations with supervisors. The use of process recordings in
supervision does not mean that supervisors cannot provide
real time feedback.
Question Assesses
Psychotherapy, Clinical Interventions, and Case Management
119. B.Co-therapy can be very beneficial but facilitators are not
responsible for change in groups. Peer support is the agent of
change. Co-facilitation takes more time and coordination than
running a group alone so facilitators must be available for
discussion and coordination. It is often beneficial when the
facilitators use divergent, not the same therapeutic,
approaches as clients can benefit from varied expertise and
techniques.
Question Assesses
Psychotherapy, Clinical Interventions, and Case Management
120. B.The answer must be related to use of “a social justice
approach.” The direct care workforce consists of mostly of
people of color who are receiving low pay for their work.
726
Raising compensation is the response choice that would assist
by structurally and systematically helping those who may lack
the educational and other opportunities afforded to those in
management positions within the agency. The other response
choices may be helpful, but they do not address the root cause
of the problem which is that the direct care workers have to
have several jobs to make a living wage. Working long hours
and not having adequate time off will lead to burnout
regardless of the provision of additional administrative support
or training aimed at raising morale.
Question Assesses
Psychotherapy, Clinical Interventions, and Case Management
121. C.The question contains a qualifying word—FIRST—that
indicates that the order of the response choices is critical. The
goal of treatment—the need for better time management
strategies—has been established so understanding why they
are needed is not currently relevant. There is no indication that
the client is trying to accomplish too much and helping the
client to understand the parameters of available time is not
related to the issue of difficulty juggling demands. Prioritization
of the client’s responsibilities is a necessary initial step in
treatment planning.
Question Assesses
Assessment, Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning
122. A.This question is based on the recall of clinical terminology
and associated mental disorders. Avolition is a term used to
describe the lack of motivation or ability to do tasks or activities
that have an end goal, such as paying bills or attending a
school function. Avolition occurs most commonly in
schizophrenia, depression, and bipolar disorder. Examples of
avolition in schizophrenia might be the inability to care for
personal hygiene or participate in work or recreational
727
activities. People experiencing avolition may withdraw from
social contact and normal activities. They often have no
enthusiasm and get little enjoyment from life. Their emotions
may become dull and conversations may be disjointed.
Question Assesses
Assessment, Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning
123. C.Making forms represent the broad diversity of gender
identities is important so that all feel included and are
adequately represented. School personnel need to understand
that gathering this information comes with the responsibility of
having policies and protections in place so that youth who
disclose non-binary gender identities or are non-conforming
are safe from bullying and discrimination. The other response
choices are not the MOST important and can be addressed.
The safety and treatment of youth is paramount so discussions
of why this information is being collected and how it will be
used to create a more inclusive school must occur
immediately.
Question Assesses
Human Development, Diversity, and Behavior in the
Environment
124. A.While confidentiality is important, there is nothing in the
question that indicates that the client does not feel comfortable
speaking to the social worker and interpreter. Essential to
engagement is the client understanding the role of the social
worker. This role definition is further complicated by the use of
an interpreter. Establishing the roles of the social worker and
interpreter must be discussed during the initial session.
Understanding the client’s mourning rituals is important, but
rapport has not yet been established so asking, which is part of
assessment, should not be the done FIRST.
728
Question Assesses
Human Development, Diversity, and Behavior in the
Environment
125. A.This question requires recall knowledge about psychotropic
medications. Benzodiazepines are a class of drugs primarily
used for treating anxiety and other conditions such as
insomnia. They also are used for sedation prior to surgery or
diagnostic procedures, muscle relaxation, alcohol withdrawal
and drug-associated agitation, and so forth.
Question Assesses
Assessment, Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning
126. A.Stimulants are an effective way of managing symptoms
associated with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder, such as
short attention span, impulsive behavior, and hyperactivity.
Mood stabilizers are used to treat disorders characterized by
intense and sustained mood shifts, such as bipolar disorder.
Antianxiety medications are used to prevent or treat anxiety
related to several disorders.
Question Assesses
Assessment, Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning
127. B.The beginning phase of service delivery is important as it is
when engagement occurs. Additionally, vital information is
exchanged. Clients do need to know about confidentiality and
its limits, but they are not MOST important in the situation
described in the question. The client has made comments that
indicate a potential lack of clarity about the problem-solving
process and the role of the social worker, which will be
important to review. It is not possible to know the expected
length of service as the nature of the problem is not yet
729
understood and goals have not been established. However,
the client must understand as services are time limited.
Question Assesses
Psychotherapy, Clinical Interventions, and Case Management
128. C.Manifest content is evidence that is directly seen such as
the words in an interview. Latent content refers to the
underlying meaning of content which is unspoken. In this
question, the social worker is identifying feelings which are
implicit in the client’s verbal and non-verbal communication. In
the question, there is no evidence of summarization—briefly
describing the main points—or clarification, when concepts are
described in an easier to understand manner.
Question Assesses
Human Development, Diversity, and Behavior in the
Environment
129. A.Case formulation, sometimes referred to as clinical
formulation when issues involve mental disorders, is an
explanation or a conceptualization of the information obtained
during assessment. It constitutes a hypothesis about the
nature of the presenting symptoms. It can include, but is more
expansive than, a single diagnosis. Case formulation provides
a framework for planning. While all phases of the problem-
solving process are interrelated, planning is MOST impacted
by case formulation.
Question Assesses
Assessment, Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning
130. B.This question requires recall of knowledge about elder
abuse. There are different ways that substance use and/or
mental health conditions can cause or exacerbate elder abuse.
730
Elder abuse usually takes place in homes and is committed by
adult family members. If the caregiver has substance abuse
and other problems, elder abuse is more likely or may be more
severe. For example, some caregivers may also begin to steal
money or financially abuse the elderly patient in order to pay
for their drug use. Individuals who abuse drugs are also more
likely to suffer from personality disorders and depression and
this may make them more likely to commit abuse or neglect.
Question Assesses
Human Development, Diversity, and Behavior in the
Environment
131. A.Exposure is an intervention strategy commonly used in
cognitive behavioral therapy to help clients confront fears.
Prolonged exposure is a specific type of cognitive behavioral
therapy that teaches clients to gradually approach trauma-
related memories, feelings, and situations. Most clients want to
avoid anything that reminds them of the trauma they
experienced but doing so reinforces their fear. By facing what
has been avoided, a client can decrease symptoms of
posttraumatic stress disorder by actively learning that the
trauma-related memories and cues are not dangerous and do
not need to be avoided.
Question Assesses
Psychotherapy, Clinical Interventions, and Case Management
132. C.Ethical standards dictate that social workers should make
reasonable efforts to ensure continuity of services in the event
of illness. While the social worker plans to work during his
treatment, there may be unexpected interruptions or lack of
availability due to appointments, fatigue, side effects, and so
forth. The clients do not need to be educated on his medical
diagnosis. They only need to know how it will impact service
delivery and their available options. Not informing clients about
731
changes in availability or risks of disruption due to the
changing health status of the social worker would be
irresponsible as clients may want to see another practitioner
temporarily or on an ongoing basis.
Question Assesses
Professional Values and Ethics
133. B.There is no provision that states that client assessment
forms include questions about culture. In fact, assessing
culture may be best completed via interviews and observations
so that social workers can hear and see the impact of culture
on behaviors, attitudes, appearance, and so forth. Self-
reflection is paramount to cultural awareness and humility.
Social workers do not need lifelong continuing education. If
they are not engaged in professional practice, such as after
retirement, such education cannot be required and may not be
needed. Also, growth results from methods other than
continuing education.
Question Assesses
Human Development, Diversity, and Behavior in the
Environment
134. A.This question requires recall of knowledge about a critical
social work term “intersectionality” which is the complex,
cumulative way in which the effects of multiple forms of
discrimination (such as racism, sexism, and classism)
combine, overlap, or intersect especially in the experiences of
marginalized individuals or groups.
Question Assesses
Human Development, Diversity, and Behavior in the
Environment
732
135. C.Social workers in rural areas face the real possibility of
knowing their clients prior to the onset of services or having the
possibilities of dual relationship present themselves.
Prescreening clients is not effective as dual relationships may
emerge or become evident later in the process. Educating
clients about dual relationships is advisable, but dual
relationships should be discussed throughout the problem-
solving process, not just during engagement. Central to
“minimizing the impacts of dual relationships” as they often
exist in rural setting is having clarity about confidentiality
mandates and client-social worker roles. This response choice
is also optimal as it describes a collaborative process with the
social worker and client working together on this important
issue.
Question Assesses
Professional Values and Ethics
136. B.Many of the response choices listed will be important, but
the order in which they occur is important. The question is
asking about the FIRST task that must be completed. Meeting
with the client to determine his preferences and discussing
parental concerns are essential, but the feasibility of having
community supports in place needs to be assessed. Without
proper support, the client may not be safe. Current needs will
drive whether the client is stable and can be discharged. Thus,
client needs should be identified so that they can be used to
address parental concerns and be considered in light of client
preferences later in the process.
Question Assesses
Assessment, Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning
137. C.This question requires recall knowledge about the efficacy of
instructional methods. When designing a parent education
733
program, it is important to include parenting skills, network-
building, and stress management. The latter two may seem
less relevant, but parents who are low-income tend to
experience social isolation and frustration at work (or in the job
search), which can negatively affect outcomes in terms of their
children’s learning and development. The same insightful and
sensitive approach must be applied to program
implementation. A classroom-style lecture, for example, is
shown to be fairly ineffective with low-income parents. Short
videos also do not allow for interaction and group discussion,
which are critical.
Question Assesses
Psychotherapy, Clinical Interventions, and Case Management
138. C.Subpoenas may be issued by judges, clerks of the court, or
attorneys. A social worker should not assume that an
attorney’s subpoena requesting client records has legal
authority requiring the release of records unless it is
accompanied by a court order signed by a judge—not the
judge’s clerk. A social worker cannot ignore a subpoena, even
if it is not signed by a judge.
The question contains a qualifying word—FIRST—so the order
of the response choices is critical. The social worker should
also not send a letter to the court without the consent of the
client. While legal consultation is always advisable, the social
worker should initially contact the client to determine the client’s
desire to share the information. The social worker cannot
assume that the client does not want the information released.
In fact, it may have been the client’s attorney who is requesting
it for a legal matter on the client’s behalf. If the client does not
want it released, there are likely going to be much discussion
with lawyers and the client to ensure that the information is
protected to the extent possible by law.
Question Assesses
734
Professional Values and Ethics
139. B. Social workers help families and family members become
more functional by highlighting positive behaviors. It is critical
that social workers recognize that change is incremental and
will be seen gradually over time. Shaping competence is a
matter of social workers not acting as experts but instead
reinforce family members for doing things right or making their
own appropriate decisions. Family interactions are always
seen as relationships which can be changed and improved,
even without long-term treatment. Structural family therapy
focuses on roles and hierarchy in families which must be
remembered when deliberating between response choices.
Question Assesses
Psychotherapy, Clinical Interventions, and Case Management
140. A.A medication that may be prescribed to inhibit alcohol use is
disulfiram (antabuse), which is classified as an aversion drug.
The medication will cause the client to experience
uncomfortable, but not ultimately harmful, side effects when
drinking. The medication is meant to condition the mind and
body to develop an aversion to alcohol. Some side effects that
might be experienced include feeling nausea, headaches, hot
sweats, and vomiting. As little as half a drink is all that is
needed for side effects to occur, and they may last up to 2
hours.
Question Assesses
Assessment, Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning
141. A.The social worker is asking a client the “miracle question”
which focuses the mind on the desired outcome. Focusing on
future goals is the essence of solution focused therapy. This
approach gets clients to focus on what they want to become
735
and how they will get there. This process is the essence of
planning. Asking the client about life without problems is not
intervening or actually taking action to address the situation—
rather it is determining what is possible. This exercise should
come after engagement so the client feels comfortable being
honest with the social worker. The focus is more on
identification of solutions, rather than gathering information
which is the essence of assessment.
Question Assesses
Assessment, Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning
142. C.While having a comparison group would be helpful to
compare the experiences of those who have reoffended with
those who have not, use of surveys will yield superficial data.
The social worker needs to understand the lived experiences
of those who have not reoffended. Focus groups will not
provide in-depth information. The MOST effective technique is
semi-structured interviews which will produce qualitative data
on key areas of interest but allow the social worker the
opportunity to probe as needed.
Question Assesses
Assessment, Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning
143. C.The question describes the classic experimental design,
also known as the pretest-posttest control group design, in
which clients are randomly assigned to treatment and control
groups. Experimental designs are needed to demonstrate
cause-effect as they account for threats to internal validity.
Quasi-experimental designs lack randomization, thereby
having more threats to internal validity. Cohort studies are
types of longitudinal studies in which those who are examined
share a common characteristic or characteristics.
Question Assesses
736
Assessment, Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning
144. C.Schizoid personality disorder can severely limit making
social connections and emotional expression. People with this
disorder may be viewed as odd or eccentric preferring to being
alone; having difficulty expressing emotions and reacting
appropriately to situations; and appearing humorless,
indifferent, or emotionally cold to others. They do not lack guilt
or cause harm to others. Clients with schizoid personality
disorder are aloof but are not often overly resentful and do not
demonstrate explosive anger like those with paranoid
personality disorder.
Question Assesses
Assessment, Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning
145. C.Providing written material to the general public about mental
health is certainly within the purview of social workers. Using
current, evidence-informed information is critical, but the social
worker does not need to be a specialist in addressing all
issues as the social worker may simply be relaying research
done by others (with proper citations of course). As readers
are not clients, there is no risk of dual relationships. The MOST
significant concern is that the social worker has not assessed
the specific needs of readers. Thus, readers may choose to
use the information to take actions that are not helpful or
advisable. It is important that readers understand becoming
educated by reading about conditions and their treatment
generally is not a substitute for professional assessment and
intervention.
Question Assesses
Professional Values and Ethics
146. A.There are three criteria required for identifying a causal
737
effect: (1) two variables need to be related; (2) the independent
variable must precede the dependent variable in time; and (3)
the independent and dependent variable cannot both be
explained by a third variable that causes both of them. The
third criterion has not been met in the question. There are
many factors that may result in both being diagnosed and
getting involved in the justice system. Diagnoses do not have
to be identified and controlled because the social worker may
be interested in mental health conditions generally. The
questions states that the data is representative so testing on
larger and more diverse client groups is not the MOST
significant threat. Additionally, the representative of the sample
relates to external validity—generalizability—not internal
validity that focuses on cause-effect.
Question Assesses
Assessment, Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning
147. A.Sigmund Freud first used catharsis as a therapeutic method
of releasing negative emotions to reduce frustration and
feelings of aggression. Catharsis is the process of venting
aggression as a way to release or get rid of emotions.
Catharsis theory is based on the premise that releasing
emotions decreases pressure or tension, so clients have fewer
negative emotions and are less aggressive. Harm reduction is
an approach designed to reduce the adverse effects of risky
behaviors (e.g., alcohol use, drug use, and indiscriminate
sexual activity), rather than to eliminate the behaviors
altogether. Transference is a client’s displacement or projection
onto a social worker of those unconscious feelings and wishes
originally directed toward other individuals in the client’s life,
such as parents.
Question Assesses
Human Development, Diversity, and Behavior in the
Environment
738
148. A.The question indicates that the business card is for social
work services. A social worker needs to clearly represent
credentials, education, and qualifications to clients. The
literature degree is not directly relevant to the provision of
social work services. By just using the title “Dr.,” clients are
likely to inappropriately assume that the doctorate is in social
work, making the action unethical. A social worker can list her
PhD, such as on her resume, but must make it known that it is
in literature. Just using “Dr.” on a social work business card
may lead to confusion by clients.
Question Assesses
Professional Values and Ethics
149. C.Self-neglect is the inability or unwillingness to attend to
personal needs or hygiene. It may manifest in different ways,
such as not attending to nutrition, hygiene, clothing, or acting
appropriately to care for medical conditions. Self-neglect can
occur as a result of dementia, brain damage, or mental
illnesses. There is no indication in the question that the client’s
condition is caused by or the result of the actions of others,
which are required for physical abuse and exploitation.
Question Assesses
Human Development, Diversity, and Behavior in the
Environment
150. C.When age is provided in a question, it generally has
relevance to selecting the correct answer. The client is
describing the actions of her son, which are concerning to her.
According to Freud, every “healthy” child evolves through five
different psychosexual stages—oral, anal, phallic, latent, and
genital. Each stage is associated with a specific part of the
body, or more specifically, erogenous zone. Each zone is a
source of pleasure and conflict during its respective stage. This
739
boy appears to be in the phallic stage based on his age and
actions. Educating the mother about these developmental
stages will help her understand the behavior and anticipate
future actions by the child. Educating her is BEST as it
increases her capacity to understand her child’s development.
Question Assesses
Human Development, Diversity, and Behavior in the
Environment
151. B.This question requires recall knowledge about parenting
styles. The authoritative parenting style has been identified as
the best approach to parenting with children raised using this
style being more capable, happy, and successful. Authoritative
parents act as role models and exhibit the same behaviors
they expect from their children. Consistent rules and discipline
also allow children to know what to expect. These parents tend
to exhibit good emotional understanding and control. Their
children also learn to manage their emotions and learn to
understand others. Authoritative parents also allow children to
act independently. This freedom teaches kids that they are
capable of accomplishing things on their own, helping to foster
strong self-esteem and self-confidence. Permissive parenting
fails to set firm limits, to monitor children’s activities closely or
to require appropriately mature behavior of their children.
Authoritarian parenting is characterized by high
demandingness and low responsiveness, with strict rules
enforced with little consideration of children’s feelings or social-
emotional and behavioral needs.
Question Assesses
Human Development, Diversity, and Behavior in the
Environment
152. C.Arbitration, a form of alternative dispute resolution, is a
process in which disputing parties agree that one or several
740
individuals can decide about the dispute after receiving
evidence and hearing arguments. Arbitration is different from
mediation because the neutral arbitrator has the authority to
decide about the dispute. Pre-trial intervention is a program to
have non-violent, first time offenders avoid incarceration or
other serious consequences so that focus on future positive
actions and avoiding more serious infractions in the future.
Question Assesses
Psychotherapy, Clinical Interventions, and Case Management
153. C.When a social worker acts as a mediator, a problem-solving
intervention is used to assist and guide others toward
resolution. The mediator does not decide the outcome, but
helps clients understand and focus on the important issues
needed to reach a resolution. In a high-conflict divorce,
intervention will be directed at compromise to address
important issues related to both person and property. The
broker role involves the process of making referrals to link
others to needed resources. When doing resource allocation,
social workers are establishing or implementing rules that
allows fair allocation of resources or funding to be made to
those who need extra support.
Question Assesses
Psychotherapy, Clinical Interventions, and Case Management
154. C.Groups can be beneficial for a variety of purposes, including
mutual aid and education. This question identifies the emotions
of family members (i.e., anger and fear) being the primary
concerns. Based on this assessment, emotional support will
MOST likely be the benefit of participation. There is no
indication in the question that family members need education
or socialization. While these areas of focus may be helpful, it is
important to choose an answer that is justified by question
wording.
741
Question Assesses
Assessment, Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning
155. C.Kohlberg reviewed people’s responses and placed them in
different stages of moral reasoning. According to Kohlberg, an
individual progresses from the capacity for preconventional
morality (before age 9) to the capacity for conventional morality
(early adolescence), and toward attaining postconventional
morality (once Piaget’s idea of formal operational thought is
attained), which only a few fully achieve. Each level of morality
contains two stages, which provide the basis for moral
development in various contexts. The age of the children is not
provided, but they are at the preconventional level based on
their actions. At the conventional level, morality is tied to
personal and societal relationships. At the postconventional
level, morality is defined in terms of more abstract principles
and values. People now believe that some laws are unjust and
should be changed or eliminated.
Question Assesses
Human Development, Diversity, and Behavior in the
Environment
156. B.The client focuses on the past during the assessment
process, causing the social worker to feel frustrated and
annoyed. The social worker’s feelings are the most significant
problem described in the question. Importantly, the client may
be speaking about the past as part of his current grieving
process. When grieving, clients often speak about past events
and memories so reminding him to speak about the present is
not appropriate. Speaking about his wife’s death may not be as
important to him as speaking about her life. The social worker
should not facilitate discussions to learn more about the wife
as it will not help address the problem. The social worker
should self-acknowledge that important information about the
742
client’s behavior is not being considered. Understanding the
importance of this information will help the social worker
alleviate frustration and be more attentive to how past
recollections can assist with present coping. Respecting the
self-determination of clients is critical to service delivery.
Question Assesses
Professional Values and Ethics
157. B.Analyses on cost-effectiveness examine both the costs and
outcomes of one or more interventions. These analyses
compare costs to gained units of a defined outcome, like a life
year gained or a death prevented in healthcare. Analyses on
cost-effectiveness can be useful in choosing between different
interventions with the same outcome. For example, a decision
maker might find it useful to determine how much one
intervention costs compared to another. Such analyses focus
on cost-benefit as opposed to identifying target populations.
Funding needed is also not the MOST important aim. Some
costly services may produce outcomes associated with
significant savings.
Question Assesses
Psychotherapy, Clinical Interventions, and Case Management
158. A.This question requires recall knowledge about structural
family therapy. A vital technique in this treatment approach is
the process of enactment that occurs when social workers
invite family members to interact directly with each other. Such
interactions bring problematic behavioral sequences into
treatment by showing them to social workers in a
demonstrative manner. This process redirects communication
between the social worker and family so that communications
and resulting changes in behaviors occur among family
members instead of between the family and social worker.
Enactment uses the relationship between family members as
743
an agent of change while it simultaneously and directly
facilitates change within the relationship.
Question Assesses
Psychotherapy, Clinical Interventions, and Case Management
159. A.Single subject designs can be useful for evaluating the
effectiveness of treatment, but the MOST significant limitation
is external validity or generalizability. Single subject designs
are very helpful when evaluating the effectiveness of services
but generalizing results to other clients is challenging. The best
way to enhance generalizability is through replication. This
question requires recall of knowledge about research
principles. Internal validity relates to confidence in cause and
effect. Single subject designs can be quite rigorous.
Instrumentation is a threat to internal validity when different
surveys or measures are used to assess the same construct,
which is a threat to internal validity not necessarily associated
with single subject research.
Question Assesses
Assessment, Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning
160. B.The question has a qualifying word, NEXT, indicating that
the order of the response choices is critical. The social worker
makes the agency supervisor aware of the situation but will
need to take additional action. Social workers should inform
clients if unauthorized access to information occurs. Social
workers should be aware of the ethical standards so should
not need to discuss the situation with a social work supervisor.
Seeking legal consultation is a good idea but does not precede
notifying clients, which is required according to professional
ethical standards.
Question Assesses
744
Professional Values and Ethics
161. B.The social worker’s statement occurs during the initial
meeting which is pivotal in establishing the therapeutic alliance
with the client. The statement by the social worker does not
directly speak to motivation or having a better life quality. The
correct response choice stresses the connection between the
client and social worker which happens during engagement.
Question Assesses
Psychotherapy, Clinical Interventions, and Case Management
162. B.The supervisor should not be researching the client’s past
criminal history without the client’s consent as the information
is not needed in this situation to prevent harm to self or others.
The social worker is asking for the supervisor’s help in locating
resources. There is no justification in the question for the
supervisor to research the client’s past criminal activities. While
supervisors may have access to the same information as those
working directly with clients, there is no indication in the
question that the social worker is even aware of this
information.
Question Assesses
Professional Values and Ethics
163. B.Social workers’ primary obligation is to protect clients and
avoid self-disclosure that has the potential to undermine
clients’ progress. They should always ask the question,
“Whose needs are being met by the disclosure?” when
considering self-disclosure. Social workers’ disclosure of
personal information to clients is sometimes self-serving and is
evidence of impairment, incompetence, or unethical conduct.
Some forms of self-disclosure are benign and may be
therapeutically useful as they help clients connect with social
745
workers and view them as humans; other forms of self-
disclosure are exploitative, self-serving, and harmful to clients.
The issue is not necessarily the amount of information
disclosed but the type of information. Disclosure about intimate
marital or relationship histories and struggles is always
inappropriate regardless of the amount of information revealed.
Indicators of boundary violations can be treating some clients
differently than others. However, social workers may be
inappropriately disclosing to all clients so there will be no
difference in treatment between clients even though the
behavior is unethical.
Question Assesses
Professional Values and Ethics
164. B.Moral injury is harm that results when acts are perpetrated,
witnessed, or not prevented that transgress the deeply held
convictions or moral beliefs of others. Those who cause moral
injury often experience distress and yearn for repair. Moral
repair focuses to restore trust and hope in relationships. While
the social worker was not the perpetrator, she failed to act. The
MOST effective intervention would be for the social worker to
address the feeling of remorse. In-depth supervision does not
directly address the issue. Also, reparations by the agency is a
distractor as it does not focus on the social worker who must
address these feelings in order to effectively work with the
client. A real or imagined apology by the social worker to the
client for the act of omission will be most effective.
Question Assesses
Professional Values and Ethics
165. C.Abrupt discontinuation of opioid use during pregnancy can
result in premature labor, fetal distress, and miscarriage.
Medical withdrawal from opioids should be conducted under
the supervision of physicians experienced in perinatal
746
addiction so referral to such physicians must occur FIRST.
Pregnant women who stop using opioids abruptly are at
greater risk of relapse and overdose death. There is also an
increased risk of harm to the fetus. Medication-assisted
treatment is typically recommended instead of withdrawal or
abstinence but referring to a medication assisted provider
occurs after attending to medical concerns and monitoring so it
is not the initial action by a social worker.
Question Assesses
Human Development, Diversity, and Behavior in the
Environment
166. C.In mental health settings, a standard clinical assessment,
called a mental status exam, is often used to assess mental
functioning. Mental status exams are especially important for
clients who are manifesting extreme symptoms of
disorientation or unusual behavior. It is helpful to examine
client behavior systematically in the areas of appearance,
general behavior, mood, flow of thought, content of thought,
orientation, language, memory, attention and concentration,
abstract reasoning, and insight and judgment. Additionally,
social workers should note clients’ dominant cultural identities
and how they influence the domains being assessed. Simply
identifying a client’s cultural identity is not enough and
consistency across all cultural groups is not appropriate as it is
a “cookie cutter” or “one size fits all” approach.
Question Assesses
Assessment, Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning
167. C.Ego strength is often used to describe clients’ abilities to
maintain their identity and sense of self despite pain, distress,
and conflict. Good defense and coping mechanisms are
important components of ego strength. Clients with well-
developed ego strength tend to share a number of essential
747
characteristics including their abilities to deal with challenges,
high levels of emotional intelligence, and successful regulation
of their emotions, even in difficult situations. Clients with low
ego strength struggle to cope in the face of problems and try to
avoid reality through wishful thinking and fantasies.
Question Assesses
Assessment, Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning
168. A.Brief psychotic disorder is the sudden onset of psychotic
behavior that lasts less than 1 month followed by complete
remission with possible future relapses. It is differentiated from
schizophreniform disorder and schizophrenia by the duration of
the psychosis. Schizophreniform disorder is characterized by
symptoms identical to those of schizophrenia but that last ≥1
month but <6 months. Schizophrenia is characterized by
psychosis (loss of contact with reality), hallucinations (false
perceptions), delusions (false beliefs), disorganized speech
and behavior, flattened affect (restricted range of emotions),
cognitive deficits (impaired reasoning and problem solving),
and occupational and social dysfunction. One or more
episodes of symptoms must last ≥6 months before the
diagnosis is made.
Question Assesses
Assessment, Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning
169. A.Social workers should rely on legal and ethical documents to
guide them when problems, such as ethical breaches occur.
Social workers should disclose confidentiality breaches to
clients involved, but clients are not experts in these matters so
conversations with them will not be most “helpful.” Supervisors
may not be social workers and may have limited knowledge
about ethical standards or what to do when breaches occur so
consulting them will not be the best course of action.
Additionally, supervisors may handle situations differently,
748
which is not advised when ethical violations related to
confidentiality occur.
Question Assesses
Professional Values and Ethics
170. B.Indirect power blocks refer to internalized oppression.
Groups with histories of mistreatment often absorb the
negative messaging of the abuse they receive. They develop
stories about their limited options and ability to achieve and
then pass those ideas down across generations. Direct power
blocks are the structures that stop people from achieving goals
such as better employment, advanced education, or safe
housing. Magical thinking is the belief that one’s ideas,
thoughts, actions, words, or use of symbols can influence
external events in the world. The community members’
negative views about their abilities are consistent with the
definition of indirect power blocks.
Question Assesses
Human Development, Diversity, and Behavior in the
Environment
497
496
495
494
493
492
491
490
489
488
487
486
485
484
500
499
498
517
516
515
514
513
512
511
528
510
527
509
526
508
525
507
524
506
523
505
522
504
521
503
520
502
519
501
518
749
Evaluation of Results
750
Index
531
Abilify (aripiprazole), 243
abuse. See also neglect
perpetrators, characteristics of, 102–104
physical, 101–102
psychological, 101
sexual, 100–101
signs of, 306
acceptance and empathy, 303
accreditation, 372
acting out, defense mechanisms, 116
active listening and observation, 174–175, 307
addiction
effects on individuals, families, groups, organizations, and communities, 122–123
indicators of, 123–124
theories and concepts, 118–122
Adderall (amphetamine, mixed salts), 246
ADHD. See attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder
administrative supervision, 359
adolescent development, 74
adolescent youth, sexuality in, 77
advocacy
theories and methods of, 347–348
advocate, social worker’s role as, 302
adult development, 74–76
adult sexuality, 77–78
Advair Diskus, 246
aging
biopsychosocial functioning, effect on, 84
Anafranil (clomipramine), 244
anger management techniques
cognitive techniques, 321
relaxation exercises, 321
antianxiety drugs, 245
antidepressants, 244–245
antimanic agents (mood stabilizers), 244
antipsychotics, 243–244
anxiety disorders, 202–204
application questions, 4
751
ASD. See autism spectrum disorder
Asendin (amoxapine), 244
assertiveness training, intervention process, 331
assessment
agency, 171
biopsychosocial, 169–170
clients/client systems, 170–171
and diagnosis, 179–251
organizational functioning, 250
practice questions, 269–291
reliability and validity, 251
Association of Social Work Boards (ASWB®) examinations
best overall approach, 17–19
considerations when studying
build focus and stamina, 12–13
concentrate on understanding over memorization, 13–14
learning styles, 14–15
prioritize content, 13
key social work terms, 43–60
question formatting and wording, 23–29
questions types, 4–5
remembering important question features, 19–23
self-assessment, 33–41
structure and conditions, 5–7
study materials and time frame, 9–12
test anxiety management, 15–16
test construction, 3–4
Ativan (lorazepam), 245
attachment theory, 83
attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), 196–197
auditory learners, 14–15
authoritarian parenting, 88
authoritative parenting, 88
autism spectrum disorder (ASD), 196
autonomy versus shame and doubt (Erikson), 65
aversion therapy, 71
Beck Depression Inventory (BDI), 170
behavioral development, 69–71
behavioral dysfunction, indicators of, 249
behavior modification, 338
behavioral theories, 85
benzodiazepines, 245
bipolar and related disorders, 199–201
biofeedback, 71
biological section, biopsychosocial assessment, 169
biological theories, 85
biopsychosocial assessment, 169–170
practice questions, 268–269
body image
752
532
negative, 87–88
positive, 87
Bowenian family therapy, 337–338
broker, social worker’s role as, 302
burnout, 425
Buspar (buspirone), 25
Carbatrol, 244
case management
case recording, documentation, and management of practice records, 349–351
components of, 348–349
practice questions, 392–394
case presentation, elements of, 363
case recording
for practice evaluation or supervision, 353
principles of, 349–351
Celexa (citalopram), 244
change agent, social worker’s role as, 302
child development, 72–73
children, sexuality in, 77
circulatory system, 248
clarification, in communication, 311
client(s)/client systems
cognitive and appraisal skills, 193
communication skills, 192
competence and self-determination, 419–420
concept of acceptance and empathy, 303
confidentiality, 413
contracting and goal-setting techniques, 330–331
coping abilities, 192–193
defenses and coping mechanisms, 194
elements of, 361–363
engage and work with involuntary, 317
evaluation methods, 262
impact of globalization on, 110
indicators and risk factors of
danger to others, 187–188
danger to self, 186–187
in problem identification
collateral sources, use of, 180
interpersonal skills and supports, 194
legal and/or ethical issues related to, 401–402
methods to engage and motivate, 316–317
motivation, resistance, and readiness to change, 189–192
objectives for intervention, treatment, and/or service plans, 342
out-of-home placement, 111
readiness for termination, 343–344
right to refuse services, 402–403
roles and responsibilities, intervention process, 303
role in problem-solving process, 315–316
753
self-care skills, 319
self-monitoring techniques, 320
strengths, resources, and challenges, 188–189
techniques and instruments, assessment, 170–171
temperamental and dispositional factors, 194
treatment planning, intervention planning, 253–254
Clozaril (clozapine), 243
cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT), 329–330
cognitive development, 66–69
cognitive techniques, anger management techniques, 321
communication
concept of congruence, 308–309
empathic, 303
styles of, 305
verbal and nonverbal techniques, 307–308
communication disorders, 196
communication theory, 128–130
communities
abuse, impact of, 102
effects of addiction and substance abuse, 122–123
effect of family dynamics, 97–98
effect of poverty, 107
effects of life events, stressors, and crises, 104–105
environmental impact, 107–108
community development, 108
community organizing, intervention process, 341
community participation, 370
compassion fatigue, 425
compensation, defense mechanisms, 116
complementary and alternative medicine (CAM), 340
concept of congruence, 308–309
Concerta (methylphenidate, long acting), 246
confidentiality
client/client system, 413
legal and/or ethical issues, 413–416
mandatory reporting, 416
practice questions, 437–444
confidentiality of client’s information, 41
conflict, human behavior and, 63
conflict resolution, 320
conflict theory, 130
confrontation, interviewing techniques, 311
conscious, levels of awareness, 325
consultation
approaches, 364–365
models of supervision and, 357–359
practice questions, 393–396
consultative feedback, 310
content validity, 265
conversion, defense mechanisms, 116
754
533
co-occurring disorders and conditions, 115
cooptation, 369
coping skills
assessment methods, 192–193
cost-benefit analysis, 354
cost-effectiveness analysis, 354
counselor, social worker’s role as, 302
couples development theories, 112–113
couples interventions
and treatment approaches, 338–339
covert modeling, role-modeling techniques, 318
Crestor, 246
criminal justice systems, 110–111
crisis intervention
and treatment approaches, 320
definition, 260
theories, 106–107
criterion-related validity, 265–266
cultural competence, 138–140
Cultural Formulation Interview Guide, 255
cultural competence, and self-determination, 419–42000
cultural identity, 79–80
culture, race, and ethnicity
behaviors, attitudes, and identity, effects on
family and kinship, 133
gender roles, 133
geographic location, 132–133
health, illness, and healing, perspectives on, 135
immigration and migration, 134
language and communication, 132
religion and spirituality, 135
sexuality, 134–135
socioeconomic status (SES), 133–134
worldview, values, and traditions, 133
cycle of violence, 306–307
Cymbalta, 246
data collection and analysis methods, 250–251
decision-making process
formal power, 372
informal power, 372
decompensation, defense mechanisms, 116
defense mechanisms
acting out, 116
compensation, 116
conversion, 116
decompensation, 116
denial, 116
devaluation, 116
displacement, 117
755
dissociation, 116–117
idealization, 117
identification, 117
identification with the aggressor, 117
incorporation, 117
inhibition, 117
intellectualization, 117
introjection, 117
isolation of affect, 117
projection, 117
projective identification, 117
rationalization, 117
reaction formation, 117
regression, 118
repression, 118
splitting, 118
sublimation, 118
substitution, 118
symbolization, 118
turning against self, 118
undoing, 118
deficiency needs, 82
denial, defense mechanisms, 116
Depakene (valproic acid, divalproex sodium), 244
Depakote sprinkles, 244
depressive disorders, 201–202
Desyrel (trazodone), 245
devaluation, defense mechanisms, 116
Dexedrine (dextroamphetamine), 246
Dexedrine Spansules (dextroamphetamine, long acting), 246
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM), 158, 195–240
differentiation, Bowenian family therapy, 337
digestive system, 248
Diovan, 246
disabilities
biopsychosocial functioning, effect of, 131–132
biopsychosocial responses to illness, 242
physical, mental, and cognitive, impact of, 81
discrimination
effects on behaviors, attitudes, and identity, 135–136
practice questions, 162–164
systemic (institutionalized), 138
displacement, defense mechanisms, 117
disruptive, impulse-control, and conduct disorders, 215–216
dissociation, defense mechanisms, 116–117
dissociative disorders, 206–207
documentation
developing formal documents, principles and processes for, 363–364
ethical issues, 406–407
principles of, 349–351
756
534
dual relationships, ethical issues, 404–405
economic justice, 108
educational supervision, 359–360
educational tests, 181
Effexor (venlafaxine), 245
ego, components of personality (Freud), 325
ego integrity versus despair (Erikson), 66
ego psychology, 327
ego strength, 194–195, 325
Elavil (amitriptyline), 244
elders, healthy growth and development, 76
electronic information security, 413–416
elimination disorders, 209–210
emotional development, 66
emotional fusion, (Bowen), 338
emotional triangle, (Bowen), 33
encounter, cultural, racial, and ethnic identity, 80
endocrine system, 248
equifinality, 99
Eskalith, 244
ethical dilemmas, 402
ethical issues
death and dying related to, 408–409
dual relationships, 404–405
electronic information security, 413–416
ethical dilemmas, 402
informed consent, principles and processes of, 405–406
mandatory reporting, 416
practice of social work, 401–402
practice questions, 429–437
regarding documentation, 406–407
research, 409–410
self-disclosure principles and applications, 405
for social worker safety, 411–412
in supervision and management, 410–411
termination, 407–408
ethnicity, 79
ethnocentrism, 139
experimental research, 264
exploitation, 182–183
extinction, 71
evidence-based practice, 425–426
face validity, 265
facial expressions, 308
family
abuse, impact of, 102
effect of poverty, 107
effects of addiction and substance abuse, 122–123
effects of life events, stressors, and crises, 104–105
757
environmental impact, 107–108
impact of caregiving, 115–116
impact of social institutions, 109
life cycle, 89–91
family dynamics
and functioning, 97–98
interpersonal relationships, 98–100
physical and mental illness, impact of, 114–115
family projection process, (Bowen), 338
family therapy
Bowenian family therapy, 337–338
functional roles in family dynamics, 335
healthy families, role, 335–336
strategic, 336–337
structural, 337
feedback
°
360
feedback, 310
consultative, 310
group-to-group, 310
intragroup, 310
one-on-one feedback, 310
principles to obtain, 309
feeding and eating disorders, 208–209
feminist theory, 125
fixation (Freud), 326
flooding, 71
formative evaluations, 262
gender dysphoria, 214–215
gender fluidity, 141
gender identity, 141–142
gender role theory, 140–141
generativity versus stagnation (Erikson), 65–66
genograms, 99–100, 173
Geodon (ziprasidone), 243
gerontology, 84–85
globalization, clients/client systems, impact on, 110
Gottman method, 339
governance structures, 371
grief, 93–94
group development, 125–128
group-to-group feedback, 310
group polarization, 128
groups
abuse, impact of, 102
effect of family dynamics, 97–98
effect of poverty, 107
effects of addiction and substance abuse, 122–123
effects of life events, stressors, and crises, 104–105
environmental impact, 107–108
758
535
groupthink, 127–128
group work
techniques and approaches, 333–334
growth needs, 82–83
Haldol (haloperidol), 243
Haldol Decanoate (long-acting injectable), 243
harm reduction approach, 319
Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA), 171
helping relationship
clarification and definition of, 300
domestic, intimate partner, and other violence, impact of, 306–307
listening, 300
nonverbal behavior, 300
process of engagement, 300–301
trust, 300
homeostasis, 99
human behavior
culture, race, and ethnicity, effects on, 132–135
impact of spirituality, 78–79
in social environment, 97–130
normal and abnormal, indicators of, 71–76
parenting skills and capacities, 88–89
practice questions, 151–161
racial, ethnic, and cultural development, 79–80
respondent and operant, 70–71
sexual orientation, influence of, 136–137
transgender and transitioning process, impact of, 137–138
human growth and development
attachment and bonding, principles of, 83
basic human needs, 82–83
biological, psychological, social, and spiritual factors, 81
body image, impact of, 87–88
effect of aging, biopsychosocial functioning, 84
family life cycle, 89–91
family life education, social work practice, 91
human genetics, basic principles of, 89
impact of aging parents, adult children, 91–92
impact of spirituality, 78–79
impacts of physical, mental, and cognitive disabilities, 81
loss, separation, and grief, dynamics and effects of, 93–94
parenting skills and capacities, 88–89
personality theories, 85
practice questions, 143–151
racial, ethnic, and cultural development, 79–80
self-image, factors influencing, 86–87
sexual development, 76–78
strengths-based and resilience theories, 93–94
systems and ecological perspectives and theories, 92–93
theories of, 63–71
759
humanist theories, 85
humanistic approach, 93
humanistic perspective, 64
Hydrocodone/acetaminophen, 246
Id, components of personality (Freud), 325
idealization, defense mechanisms, 117
identification, defense mechanisms, 117
identification with the aggressor, defense mechanisms, 117
identity versus role confusion (Erikson), 65
IHC. See integrated health care
immersion–emersion, cultural, racial, and ethnic identity, 80
immune system, 248
in vivo desensitization, 71
incorporation, defense mechanisms, 117
industry versus inferiority (Erikson), 65
individuals
abuse, impact of, 102
effect of family dynamics, 97–98
effect of poverty, 107
effects of addiction and substance abuse, 122–123
effects of life events, stressors, and crises, 104–105
environmental impact, 107–108
individual psychology, 326–327
infants
healthy growth and development, 72
sexuality in, 77
inferential statistics, 251
information gathering
client’s family history, 173
employment records, 171
medical records, 172
psychological records, 172
sensitive, methods to obtain, 173–174
sexual history, components of, 172
informed consent
ethical issues, 405–406
principles and processes of, 405–406
inhibition, defense mechanisms, 117
initiative versus guilt (Erikson), 65
insight-oriented psychotherapy, 339
integrated health care (IHC), 340
intellectualization, defense mechanisms, 117
intellectual developmental disorders, 196
interdisciplinary collaboration
basic terminology of professions, 367–368
practice questions, 393–396
process of, 365–367
social worker’s own values and beliefs on, 421
internal consistency reliability, 265
536
760
interpretation, interviewing techniques, 311
interrater/interobserver reliability, 265
intervention planning
for client participation, 253–254
components of, 256
crisis plans, methods to develop, review, and implement, 260
cultural considerations in, 254–255
discharge, aftercare, and follow-up planning, 261
evaluation methods, 262
immigration, refugee, or undocumented status, impacts, 259–260
research design and methods, 263–265
selection criteria, 255–256
social work practice, evaluation, 262–263
intervention process
anger management techniques, 321
assertiveness training, 331
cognitive and behavioral interventions, 329–330
community organizing, 341
conflict resolution, 320
contracting and goal-setting techniques, client’s/client system, 330–331
coping and other self-care skills, 319
couples interventions and treatment approaches, 338–339
crisis intervention and treatment approaches, 320
family therapy models, interventions, and approaches, 334–338
follow-up techniques, 340–341
group work techniques and approaches, 333–334
harm reduction approach, 319
interviewing, principles and techniques of, 311–312
limit-setting techniques, 317–318
methods to engage and motivate, clients/client systems, 316–317
mindfulness and complementary therapeutic approaches, 339–340
objectives for, 342
out-of-home displacement, 322–323
partializing techniques, 331–332
permanency planning, 339
phases of, 312–315
practice questions, 378–392
primary prevention strategy, 342–343
problem-solving models and approaches, 315
psychoanalytic and psychodynamic approaches, 324–329
psychoeducation methods, 333
psychotherapies, 324
readiness for termination, 343–344
risk management, 323
role playing, 318
role-modeling techniques, 318
secondary prevention strategy, 343
social planning, 342
social worker, roles and responsibilities, 303
strengths-based and empowerment strategies, 330
761
537
stress management techniques, 322
task-centered approaches, 332–333
tertiary prevention strategy, 343
time management approaches, 341
internalization and commitment, cultural, racial, and ethnic identity, 80
interviewing, principles and techniques of, 311–312
intimacy versus isolation (Erikson), 65
intragroup feedback, 310
introjection, defense mechanisms, 117
isolation of affect, defense mechanisms, 117
kinesthetic/hands-on learners, 15
Klonopin (clonazepam), 245
Kohlberg’s theory, 68–69
Lamictal (lamotrigine), 244
Lantus, 246
latent content, communication, 130
Levothyroxine sodium, 246
Lexapro (escitalopram), 244
limit-setting techniques, 317–318
Lisinopril, 246
Lithium (lithium carbonate), 244
Lithobid, 244
live modeling, 318
Loxitane (loxapine), 243
lymphatic system, 248
Luvox (fluvoxamine), 244
Lyrica, 246
macro level of intervention, 314–315
malingering, 247
mandatory reporting, 416
manifest content, communication, 130
Maslow’s hierarchy of needs, human growth and development, 83
mediator, social worker’s role as, 302
medication-induced movement disorders, 239
Mellaril (thioridazine), 243
mental and emotional illness, 239–241
mental health, influencing factors related to
biological factors, 241
psychological factors, 241
social factors, 242
mental status examination, components and function of, 180–181
Metadate (methylphenidate, long acting), 246
Metoprolol, 246
mezzo level of intervention, 314
micro level of intervention, 314
middle age adults, healthy growth and development, 75
mindfulness and complementary therapeutic approaches, 339–340
Minnesota Multiphasic Personality Inventory (MMPI), 170
762
mission statement, 371
Moban (molindone), 243
modeling, 71
motivation and resistance
indicators of, 189–191
methods to assess, 191–192
multigenerational transmission, (Bowen), 338
muscular system, 248
Myers–Briggs Type Indicator (MBTI), 170
Nardil (phenelzine), 245
NASW Code of Ethics,, 138, 139, 261, 262, 292, 330, 347, 350, 352, 353, 360, 365, 367,
369–371, 401–411, 413–416, 419, 432, 434, 436, 438, 440, 444
Navane (thiothixene), 243
negative punishment, 70
negative reinforcement, 70
neglect, 100–102
nervous system, 248
networking, 365
neurocognitive disorders, 234–236
neurodevelopmental disorders, 196–197
neurologic and organic disorders, 175–178
Nexium, 246
non-substance-related disorders, 120–121
Norpramin (desipramine), 245
nuclear family, (Bowen), 338
object relations theory, 328–329
obsessive-compulsive and related disorders, 204–205
Oedipus complex (Freud), 326
older adults, healthy growth and development, 75–76
older children, healthy growth and development, 73
one-on-one feedback, 310
operant conditioning, 70–71
organic brain syndrome, 177
organizational functioning, 250
organizations
abuse, impact of, 102
effect of family dynamics, 97–98
effect of poverty, 107
effects of addiction and substance abuse, 122–123
effects of life events, stressors, and crises, 104–105
environmental impact, 107–108
outcomes assessment, 354
out-of-home displacement, impact on clients/client systems, 322–323
out-of-home placement, client(s)/client systems impact on, 111
Pamelor (nortriptyline), 245
parallel forms reliability, 265
paraphrasing and clarifying, verbal and nonverbal communication methods, 308
Parnate (tranylcypromine), 245
538
763
partialization, 330–331
participant modeling, role-modeling techniques, 318
Paxil (paroxetine), 244
permissive parenting, 88
personality disorders, 236–238
person-in-environment (PIE) theory, 97
pluralism, 139
Piaget’s theory, 67
positive punishment, 70
positive reinforcement, 70
postures/gestures, verbal and nonverbal communication methods, 308
preadolescent youth, sexuality in, 77
preconscious, levels of awareness, 325
preencounter, cultural, racial, and ethnic identity, 80
pre-experimental research, 264
problem formulation, factors and processes used, 179
problem-solving process
client’s/client system’s role in, 315–316
short-term interventions, 315
social workers, role in, 301–302
professional development
activities to improve practice and maintain current professional knowledge, 426–427
practice questions, 443–444
social worker–client relationship, 418
techniques for protecting and enhancing, client/client system self-determination, 418–419
values and principles, 417
projection, defense mechanisms, 117
projective identification, defense mechanisms, 117
Prolixin (fluphenazine), 243
Prozac (fluoxetine), 244
psychoanalytic theory, 325
psychodrama, 126–127
psychodynamic, human behavior, 64
psychodynamic theories, 85
psychoeducation, 333
psychological dimension, biopsychosocial assessment, 169
psychological defense mechanisms, 116–118
psychological tests, 181
psychopathology, 239–241
psychosocial stress, indicators of, 182
psychotherapy, intervention process, 324
psychotropic medications, 242–246
quality assurance systems, 355
quasi-experimental research, 264
questioning, verbal and nonverbal communication techniques, 308
rational choice, human behavior, 64
rational emotive therapy (RET), 71
rationalization, defense mechanisms, 117
reaction formation, defense mechanisms, 117
764
readiness for termination, indicators of client/client system, 343–344
reasoning questions, 4, 5
recall questions, 4
reflecting/validating, verbal and nonverbal communication methods, 308
reframing and relabeling, interviewing techniques, 311
reframing, verbal and nonverbal communication methods, 308
regression, defense mechanisms, 118
relaxation exercises, anger management techniques, 321
Remeron (mirtazapine), 245
repression, defense mechanisms, 118
reproductive system, 249
respiratory system, 249
research
reliability and validity, methods to assess, 265–266
single-subject research, 264–265
types of, 264
resources
community, methods to assess, 369–370
respondent or classical conditioning (Pavlov):, 70
RET. See Rational emotive therapy
risk assessment methods, 185–186
Risperdal (risperidone), 243
Ritalin (methylphenidate), 246
role playing, intervention process, 318
role-modeling techniques, 318
role theory, 124–125
Rorschach Inkblot Test, 170
schizophrenia spectrum, 198–199
secondary trauma, 425
self-assessment
assessment and diagnosis, 36–37
biopsychosocial history and collateral data, 36
confidentiality of client’s information, 41
consultation and interdisciplinary collaboration, 40
diversity and discrimination, 35–36
human behavior, social environment, 34–35
human growth and development, 34–35
intervention process, 38–39
professional development and use of self, 41
professional values and ethical issues, 40–41
service delivery and management of cases, 39–40
therapeutic relationship, 38
treatment planning, 37
self-determination, 419–420
self-image
factors influencing, 86–87
self psychology, 327
Serentil (mesoridazine), 243
Seroquel (quetiapine), 243
765
539
service delivery
advocacy, 347–348
agency programs evaluation, 354
employee recruitment, 351
employee retention, 352
evaluation formats/methods, 352–353
methods of, 348
policies, procedures, regulations, and legislation, 345–346
policy-making, impact of the political environment, 346–347
practice questions, 392–394
program evaluation findings, 354
quality assurance, 355
service networks or community resources, methods to establish, 351
Serzone (nefazodone), 245
sexual abuse
indicators and dynamics of, 100–101
sexual behavior, 136–137
sexual dysfunction, 175, 213-214
sexual identity, 137
sexual orientation
behaviors, attitudes, and identity, influence on, 136
concepts, 140
shaping, 71
sibling position, (Bowen), 338
silence, 308
Simvastatin, 246
Sinequan (doxepin), 245
skeletal system, 249
sleep–wake disorders, 210–213
SNAP. See Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program
social change, and community development, 108
social constructionist:, human behavior, 64
social development, 64–66
social dimension, biopsychosocial assessment, 169
social institutions, 109–110
social justice, 108
social planning, intervention process, 342
social policy
techniques to inform and influence, 368–369
social work assessment, 181
social worker(s)
and service delivery, 345–346
basic medical terminology, 248–249
client’s needed level of care, 248
concept of acceptance and empathy, 303
criminal justice system, 110–111
cultural considerations, intervention planning, 254–255
diversity, dynamics of, 304–305
risk assessment methods, 185–186
role in problem-solving process, 301–302
766
roles and responsibilities of, 303
safe and positive work environment, 422–424
self-care principles and techniques, 424
social work practice
communication concepts, 129–130
culturally competent, principles of, 138–140
family life education, 91
methods, techniques, and instruments used, 262–263
process of engagement, 300–301
social worker–client relationship
client’s developmental level, 305–306
components of, 299
influence of the social worker’s own values and beliefs, 420–421
power and transparency in, 301
professional boundaries in, 403–404
professional development, 418
transference and countertransference in, 421–422
societal regression, (Bowen), 338
somatic symptom and related disorders, 207–208
somatization, 247
spiritual dimension, biopsychosocial assessment, 169
splitting, defense mechanisms, 118
Stanford–Binet Intelligence Scale, 171
Stelazine (trifluoperazine), 243
stimulants, 246
stratification, 139
stress management techniques, 322
sublimation, defense mechanisms, 118
substance abuse
effects on individuals, families, groups, organizations, and communities, 122–123
indicators of, 123–124
substance-related and addictive disorders, 216–233
substance use disorder
stages of treatment, 121
symptoms of, 119–120
treatment approaches, 122
treatment goals, 121
substitution, defense mechanisms, 118
subsystems, family dynamics, 99
summarization, interviewing techniques, 311
summative evaluations, 262
superego, components of personality (Freud), 325
supervision
educational components, techniques, and methods, 359–360
ethical issues, 410–411
facilitated group, 359
individual, 358
learning needs and develop learning objectives, methods to identify, 361
models of, 357–359
peer group, 358–359
767
540
supervisee’s role in, 360
Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP), 171
supportive supervision, 359
Surmontil (trimipramine), 245
symbolic modeling, role-modeling techniques, 318
symbolization, defense mechanisms, 118
Synthroid, 246
systematic desensitization, 71
systems, human behavior, 63
TANF. See Temporary Assistance for Needy Families
TAT. See Thematic Apperception Test
Tegretol (carbamazepine), 244
Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (TANF), 171
test–retest reliability, 265
Thematic Apperception Test (TAT), 171
therapeutic relationship
feedback, methods to obtain and provide, 309–310
helping relationship, principles and techniques for, 299–301
power and transparency in, 301
practice questions, 374–377
problem-solving process, 301–302
social worker–client/client system relationship, components of, 299
Thorazine (chlorpromazine), 243
°
360
feedback, 310
time management approaches, intervention process, 341
time out, 71
toddlers
healthy growth and development, 72
Tofranil (imipramine), 245
token economy, 71
Topamax (topiramate), 244
trait theories, 85
transference and countertransference, supervisory relationships, 422
transgender, impact on behaviors, attitudes, identity, and relationships, 137–138
trauma
assessment methods, 184–185
emotional and psychological, 105–106
trauma- and stressor-related disorders, 205–206
trauma-informed care
methods and approaches to
mourning and remembrance, 258
reconnection and reintegration, 258–259
safety and stabilization, 257–258
theories of, 257
traumatic stress, 183–184
Trilafon (perphenazine), 243
treatment planning
clients/client systems, 253–254
practice questions, 291–294
768
541
SOAP format, 263
trust versus mistrust (Erikson), 64
turning against self, defense mechanisms, 118
unconscious, levels of awareness, 325
undoing, defense mechanisms, 118
uninvolved parenting, 89
universalization, interviewing techniques, 312
urinary system, 249
Valium (diazepam), 245
Ventolin, 246
Vivactil (protriptyline), 245
violence
effect on behavior, 103–104
impact of, 105–106
indicators of, 184
visual learners, 14
Vyvanse, 246
Wechsler Intelligence Scale (WISC), 171
Wellbutrin (bupropion), 245
WISC. See Wechsler Intelligence Scale
Xanax (alprazolam), 245
young adults, healthy growth and development, 74–75
young children, healthy growth and development, 72–73
Zoloft (sertraline), 244
Zyprexa (olanzapine), 243
769
Study Notes
770
Practice Test
170-Question Practice Test
This practice test contains 170 questions but remember that your score
on the actual examination will be based on 150 questions because 20
items are being piloted. As you won’t know which items will be scored
and determine whether or not you pass, you will need to complete all
170 questions. Thus, this test has 170 questions so that you can gauge
the length of time that it takes you to complete an equivalent number of
questions. The questions in each domain or area are in random order on
this practice test, as they are on the actual examination, and there is a
similar distribution of questions from each section as will appear on your
actual examination.
Human Development, Diversity, and Behavior in the Environment
41 Questions
Assessment, Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning
51 Questions
Psychotherapy, Clinical Interventions, and Case Management
46 Questions
Professional Values and Ethics
32 Questions
The best way to use this practice test is as a mock examination, which
means:
a. Take it AFTER you have completed your studying—do not memo
answers to these questions.
771
b. Do not apply the answers to these questions to the actual examina
or you may miss subtle differences in each question that can distingu
the correct from the incorrect response choices.
c. Take it in its entirety during a 4-hour block of time to show yourself
you can finish in the allotted time period for the examination.
d. Do not look up the correct answers until you are completely finished w
the entire practice test, and do not worry if you get questions incorr
Remember, this examination is not one in which you can expect to
all of the answers correct. The number of questions that y
will need to answer correctly generally varies from 90
107 correct of the 150 scored items.
1. Grounding techniques used with clients who are experiencing
flashbacks of past traumatic events primarily aim to:
A. Connect clients with the present so that they do not have
additional negative effects associated with reliving their past
traumatic experiences
B. Assist clients to understand the triggers for their flashbacks so
that they can be reduced or avoided in the future
C. Teach clients coping skills to reduce the emotional, physical,
social, and other impacts of trauma on personal well-being
2. A client tells a social worker that she has been communicating with
her recently deceased son. The client states that she has an altar in
her home at which she leaves daily food offerings. She is hopeful that
her son will return to the home sometime in the future to visit her. In
this situation, the MOST important action for the social worker to:
A. Determine if the client is at risk for self-harm
B. Assess the client for psychotic symptoms
C. Understand the mourning rituals of the client’s culture
3. Given her family history, a client who has recently married undergoes
genetic testing to learn if she is a carrier of a specific disease. Upon
learning that she is a carrier, the client becomes very upset that the
news will impact a future decision to have children. The client is
772
nervous about telling her husband as he is not aware of the testing.
In this situation, the social worker should FIRST:
A. Arrange a joint session with the husband to support the client
when she tells him
B. Work with the client to minimize the anxiety and depression that
she is experiencing
C. Help the client understand the likelihood of her children having
the disease
4. A client reports feeling very frustrated by his wife’s behavior. She
becomes upset when he is quiet at the dinner table, but constantly
criticizes him when he speaks. What BEST describes what the client
is experiencing?
A. A paradoxical directive
B. A double bind
C. A negative feedback loop
5. What should be the focus when a social worker is treating clients who
have experienced complex childhood trauma?
A. Removal of and protection from other sources of trauma
B. Recognition that recovery is possible and can occur quickly
C. Acknowledgement that what was lost can all be recovered
6. A social worker who provides counseling to clients in a job training
program is charged with evaluating the program’s effectiveness. The
social worker finds that 80% of clients get jobs and keep them for a
year after graduation. Which of the following is the focus of the social
worker’s assessment?
A. Outcome
B. Impact
C. Output
7. A client who was briefly admitted to the hospital after a panic attack is
being discharged with a prescription for a benzodiazepine. Which of
the following medications has been recommended?
773
A. Prolixin
B. Prozac
C. Ativan
8. What is the MOST significant difference between bipolar I and
bipolar II disorders?
A. Bipolar II never includes psychosis which is always present in
bipolar I
B. Depression is more severe in bipolar I as compared with bipolar
II
C. Bipolar I must include at least one manic episode while bipolar II
includes only hypomania
9. A school social worker is asked by a funder to conduct an evaluation
of a youth services program. The evaluation is based on personal
interviews with middle school children who are participating in the
program. What permissions will be needed for the social worker to
ethically conduct the evaluation?
A. Consent from the children’s guardians
B. Assent from the children and consent from their guardians
C. Consent from the children
10. Due to an agency closure, a social worker has referred a client to a
new provider. With the client’s consent, all relevant treatment
information has been transferred. The social worker and client have
also had several joint meetings with the new provider to discuss
ongoing client needs. Several weeks later, the social worker learns
that the client has had no contact with the new provider despite
numerous outreach attempts. The social worker feels strongly that
ongoing treatment is needed. The social worker should:
A. Seek consultation to determine if steps in the referral process
inhibited continuity of treatment
B. Send a termination letter with the discharge plan and contact
information of the new provider
C. Meet with the client to determine issues that have prevented
following through
774
11. When social workers receive clinical supervision from those who
are not employed in their agencies, which of the following is MOST
important for social workers to obtain?
A. Contractual agreements with supervisors and agencies
B. Authorization by agency directors allowing social workers to
receive outside clinical supervision
C. Consent from clients that information will be discussed with non-
agency employees
12. When clients have co-occurring mental health and substance use
disorders, what is the appropriateness of taking psychotropic
medications?
A. Psychotropic medications should not be taken when there are
co-occurring disorders
B. Psychotropic medications can only be prescribed if clients
understand the side effects
C. Psychotropic medications are part of accepted treatment
protocols in some instances
13. Who has the ultimate responsibility for selecting models of social
work supervision?
A. Administrators
B. Supervisees
C. Supervisors
14. A social worker is making a level of care determination for an older
adult client who will be moving from home into a residential setting.
Which of the following client abilities will be MOST helpful for the
social worker to assess?
A. Adaptation to life changes
B. Management of medical problems
C. Perform activities of daily living
15. During an assessment, a social worker learns that a couple spends
little time apart despite having problems that have caused them to
seek treatment. The wife feels lonely when her husband travels for
775
work as she has few friends outside the marriage. The husband
states that he is “smothered,” but gets jealous easily, causing him to
contact his wife frequently throughout the day. The husband reports
that he is often unhappy as his wife seems miserable, while the wife
states that she is frustrated as she is just trying to find ways to
make her husband more content. In order to BEST address the
problem, which of the following actions should be the focus of
treatment?
A. Assisting the wife to develop a stronger sense of self-worth in the
marriage
B. Helping the husband and wife to better understand each other’s
feelings
C. Differentiating roles and boundaries for the husband and wife in
the relationship
16. A social worker has additional information on a client situation that
the social worker would like to add to the record as this information
helps clarify discussions that took place with the client during the
last session. In this situation, the social worker should:
A. Ask a supervisor about agency protocol related to management
of client records
B. Add the material to the previous case note to clarify material
presented in the last session
C. Record the information as a new, separate record entry with a
reason for the addition
17. A client is referred to a social worker as she has been repeatedly
hospitalized due to medication noncompliance. During the
assessment, the client admits to frequently missing doses of her
prescribed medication. This behavior has resulted in numerous
inpatient stays, which she complains are both costly and adversely
impacting her quality of life. Which of the following is the BEST
question for the social worker to ask?
A. “Why haven’t you been able to take your medication as
prescribed?”
B. “Can you think of any advantage of having to stay in the
hospital?”
776
C. “What are some of the reasons for skipping your medication?”
18. When is family therapy BEST introduced in the treatment of clients
with substance use disorders?
A. Concurrently with clients’ acknowledgements that substance use
problems exist
B. Immediately after clients complete detoxification
C. Once clients are stable in their new patterns of behavior
19. During a session, a client discloses to a social worker that she was
sexually abused by her father when she was an adolescent. The
client has never confronted her father and does not want the social
worker to disclose the information. There is no legal duty to report
the abuse since the client is no longer a minor. The father poses no
current threat to children given a significant decline in his
functioning. In order to handle the situation ethically, the social
worker should:
A. Respect the client’s wishes by keeping the disclosure
confidential
B. Seek supervision to determine whether to keep the information
confidential
C. Report the suspected abuse to the child welfare agency
20. Which of the following is the MOST important reason for seeking
feedback from a client during the beginning phase of treatment?
A. Ensuring an understanding of the client’s problem
B. Focusing the treatment on a client’s feelings and thoughts
C. Emphasizing that treatment is a mutual and reciprocal process
21. Which of the following describes the structured inequality of entire
categories of people who have different access to social rewards
because of their status, power, and wealth?
A. Social stratification
B. Discrimination
C. Institutional malfeasance
777
22. Which of the following documentation practices of supervisory
sessions is MOST appropriate in social work?
A. Supervisory records should solely be maintained by supervisors
as they are legally responsible for the delivery of services by
supervisees
B. No records should be kept by either supervisees or supervisors
in order to maintain client confidentiality
C. Supervisees and supervisors should maintain separate records
of each session with both parties being able to access the
other’s notes as needed
23. A newly hired social worker in an agency setting learns that he will
simultaneously be supervised by more than one person. In order to
minimize conflicts in this situation, the social worker should:
A. Develop a memorandum of understanding with the supervisors
B. Meet with the supervisors simultaneously at all times
C. Review the professional code of ethics with the supervisors
24. The primary goal of court-ordered competency restoration is for
clients to:
A. Identify ways to provide restitution for actions which have
harmed others
B. Develop or regain ability to participate in legal proceedings
C. Serve legal sentences that have been imposed but not served
due to mental impairment
25. Which of the following is a condition often cited by courts when
deciding whether information is considered privileged?
A. Harm caused by keeping information confidential outweighs the
benefits
B. Written records documenting services have been kept secured
C. Parties involved in the communication assumed that it was
confidential
26. A client tells a social worker that she is having problems with her
teenage daughter’s behavior. The daughter has begun to violate
778
strict rules set in the home. The client, who is frustrated with this
disobedience, states that she often does not speak to her child for
days as punishment. The client does not understand why the girl
questions the rules and does not behave as expected. Based on
this description, which style of parenting is the client MOST likely
using?
A. Authoritarian
B. Authoritative
C. Uninvolved
27. A couple seeks assistance from a social worker as they are having
problems in their marriage. While they have been happily married
for about 10 years, the wife complains that issues have arisen in the
last year as her husband frequently telephones his mother after the
couple argues. The wife states that she now feels uncomfortable
when with her mother-in-law and is worried that her mother-in-law
has a negative opinion of her based on her husband’s
conversations. The husband insists that he has tried to work out
issues directly with his wife but needs his mother’s opinion to
successfully resolve his feelings. Which of the following BEST
describes this family dynamic?
A. Role reversal
B. Triangulation
C. Entropy
28. Which of the following is BEST characterized as a delusion of
reference?
A. Insisting assertions are correct despite contradictory evidence
B. Believing neutral stimuli or communications have personal
meaning or messages
C. Attributing personal failure to external factors that cannot be
controlled
29. According to client-centered therapy, what is essential for a climate
conducive to growth and therapeutic change?
A. Cultural competence
779
B. Positive unconditional regard
C. Client expertise
30. A mandated client questions the confidentiality of specific
documentation that is generated as part of treatment. The social
worker should:
A. Suggest the client speak to legal counsel to determine whether
material is privileged
B. Review the court order with the client to determine what
documents have to be released
C. Explain that client consent will be obtained prior to releasing any
records to the court
31. Which of following is considered best practice in treating pregnant
women who are addicted to heroin?
A. Continued use of heroin under medical supervision
B. Discontinuation of all opioids immediately
C. Enrollment in a methadone maintenance program
32. A social worker employed at a nursing home notices that a client
with Alzheimer’s disease experiences heightened delirium during
the evening hours with improvement during the day. Which of the
following terms BEST describes this client’s change in mental
state?
A. Folie à deux
B. Sundowning
C. Neurodegeneration
33. A social worker is assisting a client to cope with depression after a
stroke. The client reports having difficulty meeting his basic needs
and suggests having his daughter come to the next session to
discuss his current problems as she lives nearby and is supportive.
In this situation, the social worker should:
A. Determine whether other family members or friends should be
included in the meeting
B. Explain that including her in sessions is not allowed due to
780
confidentiality standards
C. Ensure there is an agreement about the meeting purpose and
what information will be shared
34. A hospital social worker being supervised by a professional of a
different discipline is having difficulty with a social work practice
issue. The social worker should:
A. Seek supervision or consultation from another social worker
B. Consult professional resources to identify possible solutions
C. Determine how the issue would be handled in the supervisor’s
discipline
35. Which of the following is the primary aim of performance monitoring
in social work agencies?
A. Identifying key aspects of program operations
B. Determining whether program objectives are being achieved
C. Justifying the need for service delivery to meet target problems
36. A social worker is counseling a client who suffers from depression
and has recently been hospitalized for a suicide attempt. During a
therapy session, the social worker notices that the client appears
significantly more cheerful than she has in past weeks. The client
reports that she feels better generally without citing any specific
reasons for her improved affect. In this situation, the social worker
should FIRST:
A. Praise the client for the progress that she has made since her
hospital discharge
B. Conduct a suicide risk assessment of the client
C. Ask about changes that have taken place in the client’s life in the
last week
37. A client who was recently promoted speaks to a social worker about
how he believes that his boss does not like him and is critical of his
work despite never verbally stating any dissatisfaction. The client,
who has lost a previous job due to company downsizing, is nervous
that he might be fired if rumors of financial troubles in the business
781
prove accurate. After accurately reflecting the client’s nervousness,
the social worker should NEXT:
A. Listen as the client describes further feelings about his
relationship with his boss
B. Suggest that the client’s feelings may result from his prior job
loss
C. Help the client examine behavioral cues by his boss that support
or dispel his claims
38. A social worker charged with giving a case presentation provides
background and demographic information on the client, the reason
for the presentation, and the interventions delivered. Which of the
following would MOST appropriately describe this case
presentation?
A. Inappropriate as a case presentation should never contain
demographic information
B. Incomplete because it did not include the nature of the problem
C. Acceptable as a basis for collaborative discussion with other
treating professionals
39. According to a public health model, which of the following is the
desired outcome of screening for those found to be at-risk of a
medical or behavioral health condition?
A. Further diagnostic testing
B. Referral to treatment
C. Targeted education
40. The primary goal of attending behavior by social workers is to:
A. Determine the scope and severity of client problems
B. Assist clients to identify alternatives which result in change
C. Encourage clients to speak openly about their concerns
41. Which of the following is the MOST critical factor in the selection of
an appropriate intervention?
A. Presenting problem
782
B. Past service history
C. Agency setting
42. A social worker meeting with a 10-year-old boy and his mother
notices what appear to be bite marks on the boy’s legs. The social
worker suspects that the marks resulted from physical abuse in the
home. The mother asks if the social worker will be reporting the
incident to the authorities. The social worker should FIRST:
A. Document the nature of the injuries
B. Ask to meet with the child alone
C. Inform the mother and child that reporting is required
43. A social worker receives a referral from a high school guidance
counselor for a student who has received a full scholarship to
college but decided not to attend due to family responsibilities at
home. Both school officials and the social worker feel that the
student is making a mistake as it is unlikely that she will be able to
attend college without the current scholarship opportunity. In order
to effectively work with the student, the social worker should:
A. Understand the extent of the family responsibilities that prevent
her attendance
B. Determine the short- and long-term career goals of the student
C. Acknowledge the differences in values that may exist between
the student and school personnel
44. Which action would be MOST appropriate when using a medical
model to treat gender dysphoria?
A. Providing medication and surgical interventions as needed
B. Exploring mind–body connections associated with gender
nonconformity
C. Screening for physical conditions that may accompany the
disorder
45. Which of the following is an assessment to detect an alcohol or
substance use problem?
A. AUDIT
783
B. SCOFF
C. MDS
46. Which of the following is the primary distinction between defense
and coping mechanisms?
A. Defense mechanisms are discrete reactions to traumatic
stressors while coping mechanisms are continuous unconscious
actions taken to deal with everyday life events
B. Defense mechanisms are maladaptive methods of addressing
threatening events while coping mechanisms are based on
healthy decisions aimed toward self-preservation
C. Defense mechanisms are unconscious while coping
mechanisms involve deliberate cognitive and emotional
modifications
47. In an initial meeting with a man who has been mandated to receive
counseling due to severely beating his young son, a social worker
explains the terms outlined in the court order and what can be
expected in treatment. The social worker ends by asking the client,
“What do you think about what we have talked about so far?” The
purpose of the social worker’s question is to:
A. Assess the presence of denial with regard to the incident in
question
B. Identify whether the client is aware of the legal mandates placed
upon him
C. Convey to the client that treatment is a mutual and reciprocal
process
48. Which approach is a social worker using when viewing marital
problems as stemming from different understandings and
expectations that spouses have of their marriages?
A. Psychodynamic
B. Symbolic interactionism
C. Functionalist
49. In an initial meeting with a man who is seeking assistance after
several arrests, a social worker determines that his reasoning is
784
significantly impaired as he admits to using drugs before the
meeting. The social worker wants to obtain the man’s consent to
find out more about his arrests and begin providing services aimed
at assisting him to meet his basic needs. However, the social
worker questions his ability to understand what she is asking and
understand the information provided on the agency’s consent form.
The social worker should:
A. Waive the informed consent procedures since the man is in need
of services immediately
B. Employ verbal informed consent procedures in lieu of written
forms given his impairment
C. Arrange to meet the man at a later time when informed consent
can be obtained
50. During an assessment, a client reveals a long history of substance
abuse, but states that she has not used drugs in the last 15 years.
She reports that she was sexually abused as both an adult and
child, engaging in prostitution for many years. The client states that
she has a strained relationship with her three children who she did
not raise. Recent health problems have resulted in loss of
ambulation, requiring her to use a wheelchair when leaving the
house. The client reports that she has become isolated and unable
to meet her friends due to issues with transportation. Not seeing her
friends has resulted in her feeling worthless. The client feels that
meeting with her friends as she did in the past would help decrease
her feelings of insignificance. Which of the following would be the
MOST important step in establishing a measurable target for this
objective?
A. Finding out the frequency of contact with her friends in her
premorbid functioning
B. Determining the impact of the poor relationships with her children
on her current feelings
C. Assessing the magnitude of her hopelessness and depression
51. A social worker is treating a client with bipolar I disorder. When the
client is in a depressive state, she feels out of control and that
785
something terrible will happen. Which specifier should be added to
this client’s diagnosis to further clarify her symptoms?
A. With melancholic features
B. With anxious distress
C. With rapid cycling
52. Which of the following does not alleviate emotional distress due to
caregiving?
A. Transition of the person requiring care into a nursing home
B. Improvement in activities of daily living of the person requiring
care
C. Recovery from illness that impeded functioning of the person
requiring care
53. According to the DSM, which specifier can be used with obsessive-
compulsive and related disorders?
A. With dissociative symptoms
B. With poor insight
C. With anxiety
54. According to the DSM, which is not a specifier used for autism
spectrum disorder?
A. Associated with psychosocial stressors
B. With or without accompanying language impairment
C. With or without accompanying intellectual impairment
55. A client who is sexually attracted to other men tells a social worker
that he is very distressed over his homosexuality. He has low self-
esteem and appears distraught. The client feels that he will not be
accepted by others. In assisting the client to formulate treatment
goals, the social worker should:
A. Role model discussions with family and friends about his
sexuality
B. Identify those in his life who the client feels will not accept him
C. Explore the client’s past relationship with family and friends to
786
better understand his concerns
56. A social worker receives a counseling referral for a student who is
getting a social work degree at a local university. The social worker
teaches a course in the program but has not had the student in
class. In order to handle the situation ethically, the social worker
should:
A. Speak with the program director to determine if it is likely that the
student will need to take a course with the social worker
B. Meet with the student to assess whether the problems that the
student is experiencing pose a conflict of interest for the social
worker
C. Inform the student that services cannot be provided given the
potential for a conflict of interest
57. Which is a negative symptom of schizophrenia?
A. Hallucinations
B. Delusions
C. Difficulty beginning and sustaining activities
58. When a social worker is meeting with a court-ordered client for the
first session, the client appears apprehensive about discussing
mandated services. Which of the following is MOST likely the
cause of the client’s behavior?
A. Fear of having information shared with those in the criminal
justice system
B. Unwillingness to change the behavior which caused the current
problems
C. Feelings about not being given a choice about service provision
59. When doing narrative therapy, how should a social worker view a
client problem?
A. As part of a larger system so that a client does not internalize
responsibility
B. Enmeshed with a client’s sense of self which necessitates the
need for change
787
C. Separate or external from a client so that it can be deconstructed
and controlled
60. A social worker who is treating a client with binge eating disorder
asks the client to engage in self-monitoring by writing down what is
eaten and any triggers of excessive food intake. Which practice
method is MOST likely being used by the social worker?
A. Task-centered treatment
B. Cognitive behavioral therapy
C. Narrative therapy
61. Which of the following is the BEST definition of hegemony within
society?
A. Universal rejection of practices that do not value all people as
equal
B. Power of one group to lead and dominate other groups
C. Discrimination based on gender norms that promote masculine
identities
62. Which statement is accurate about those diagnosed with borderline
personality disorder?
A. They are less likely than those without the disorder to be
childhood neglect or abuse victims
B. They usually show little improvement in social functioning over
time even when treated
C. They often do not meet the criteria for the disorder if assessed a
decade after the first diagnosis
63. A social worker is concerned about a client’s alcohol use and wants
to use a brief four-question screening instrument to assess for
problem drinking and possible alcohol problems. First, the social
worker asks the client whether she has ever wanted to cut down on
her drinking. The social worker then questions whether the client
ever felt bad or guilty about her drinking. Lastly, the social worker
inquires about whether the client has ever had a drink first thing in
the morning (an “eye opener”) to steady her nerves or get rid of a
788
hangover. In order to complete the assessment, which of the
following should be the focus of the social worker’s last question?
A. Legal involvement resulting from the client’s drinking
B. Whether criticism about her drinking has made the client
annoyed
C. If medical problems that have recently been diagnosed related to
the client’s drinking
64. If a social worker is ordered to release information without a client’s
consent and such disclosure would cause harm to a client, the
social worker’s MOST appropriate action is to:
A. Request that the court withdraw the order
B. Minimize releasing harmful information by redacting sensitive
material
C. Ask that the records be maintained under seal
65. Which statement BEST supports the need for professional
development of social workers?
A. Staying well-informed of social work issues and trends makes
social workers more competitive in the job market
B. New research provides social workers with information that can
impact the use of interventions in practice
C. Many licensing boards require social workers to take continuing
education courses to obtain or maintain professional credentials
66. What is the MOST significant contributor to cultural convergence?
A. Education
B. Globalization
C. Marriage
67. When completing intake paperwork, a client identifies as “Latinx.”
What meaning can the social worker assign to the use of this term
by the client?
A. The client identifies with a demographic age cohort of people
who were born in the mid-1960s
789
B. The client values gender identities that are not strictly binary
C. The client is of Latin American descent but is not Spanish
speaking
68. A social worker is terminating with an adolescent who has shown
marked improvement in her anxiety. She received counseling for
several months to address school absenteeism, which resulted from
her excessive nervousness. During the termination process, the
social worker learns that the client will be going to a new school due
to redistricting. In this situation, the social worker should:
A. Conduct an assessment to determine whether termination is still
appropriate
B. Acknowledge progress that the client has made during treatment
C. Contact student services at the new school to see if follow-up
services are available
69. How should a social worker store psychotherapy notes to afford a
client the greatest confidentiality protection?
A. In a separate section of the client’s file
B. Separate from the rest of the client’s clinical record
C. According to agency policy
70. A social worker believes that the client who abruptly stopped
smoking cannabis after heavy, prolonged daily use may meet the
criteria for a diagnosis of cannabis withdrawal. The social worker
notices that the client is anxious and restless immediately after
quitting. Which of the following signs must also be present for the
diagnosis to be made?
A. Depressed mood
B. Increased appetite or weight gain
C. Hallucinations
71. A social worker receives a referral for a child with a
neurodevelopmental disorder who is having trouble in school. The
social worker’s goal is to identify appropriate learning opportunities
within the school setting that can help address areas of delay. In
790
which of the following areas will in-depth knowledge be needed by
the social worker to effectively work with this child?
A. Child growth
B. School policy
C. Past academic performance
72. When there is a distant relationship between family members,
which type of line is used to connect these individuals in a
genogram?
A. Dotted
B. Shaded
C. Jagged
73. A client who has a stable, well-paying job tells a social worker that
she plans to quit in the coming weeks. The client states that she is
miserable, but she is not able to specify what she does not like
about her current employment. The social worker feels that the
client is making a poor decision which could have serious
ramifications for her financial well-being. In order to handle this
situation appropriately, the social worker should FIRST:
A. Acknowledge the client’s right to make her own decisions about
her life
B. Assess whether there have been changes in the client’s life that
have resulted in this decision
C. Review with the client the risks and benefits of leaving her job
74. A client with brain damage due to Korsakoff syndrome often tells
stories based on false memories of events which never occurred.
Which of the following BEST describes this disorder?
A. Reaction formation
B. False memory syndrome
C. Confabulation
75. Which type of law initially established social workers’ duty to
disclose confidential information without client consent to protect
third parties from harm?
791
A. Case
B. Constitutional
C. Regulatory
76. When a social worker experiences a value conflict with a client, the
social worker should:
A. Refer the client to another social worker
B. Respect the client’s right to self-determination
C. Acknowledge the impact of this conflict on the problem-solving
process
77. A woman seeks the help of a social worker because her son who
has schizophrenia will not take medication. She is distraught as his
mental illness is causing significant problems in the functioning of
the family. Which of the following factors should the social worker
emphasize as the factor is the MOST prevalent reason why clients
with this diagnosis often do not take medications?
A. Side effects
B. Anosognosia
C. Denial
78. Which of the following is the BEST definition of intersectionality?
A. Conflicting values that are rooted in differences in beliefs that
undermine pluralism
B. Negative impacts in social, emotional, and other life domains due
to discrimination
C. Interdependent forms of privilege resulting from different social
locations and power relations
79. A social worker receives a referral for a young woman who was
recently arrested after assaulting someone on the street. At intake,
she reported being surprised that she got into a fight but admits that
she was drinking at the time of the incident. In describing her
childhood, she uses a flat affect when mentioning severe physical
and sexual abuse at the hands of her mother’s boyfriend between
ages 4 and 15. The client states that her abuse does not affect her
792
life now, but she is unable to answer specific questions about the
abuse due to being unable to remember much about the time
period. Which of the following responses to trauma is the client
MOST likely experiencing?
A. Excessive guilt
B. Intrusive thoughts and memories
C. Dissociation
80. Which behavior would be atypical for a client with a diagnosis of
schizoid personality disorder?
A. Avoiding sexual relationships
B. Engaging in angry outbursts when criticized
C. Declining invitations to social events
81. Which situation would warrant family-centered social work practice
over individual counseling?
A. Boundaries within the family structure are continually being
violated
B. Violence is being perpetrated by one family member against
another
C. Stabilization is needed for a family member in crisis due to
substance abuse and/or psychosis
82. A social worker receives a referral for a client who has been
diagnosed with both obsessive-compulsive disorder and tic
disorder. The client reports regularly taking the medication
prescribed by his psychiatrist, but still not being able to control his
urges. He would like help to reduce his obsessive thoughts and
compulsions that accompany them. In order to best assist the client,
which of the following therapeutic models should the social worker
employ?
A. Solution-focused
B. Psychoanalytic
C. Behavioral
83. A social worker is conducting an assessment with a client who has
793
been living with a chronic disease for many years. The client has
been able to manage the symptoms of her illness successfully with
no reported negative impact on her daily life. She has just learned
that she will need to begin a complicated medication regimen in the
coming weeks to slow the illness’s progression. The client is very
worried about ensuring that the drug administration does not
adversely affect her current routine. Which of the following will
BEST meet the client’s needs?
A. Case management
B. Psychoeducation
C. Psychotherapy
84. A social worker is hired by an agency to provide consultation aimed
at reducing high client dropout rates. According to the funder, a
greater proportion of this agency’s clients leave services when
compared with clients of similar providers. Which of the following is
the source of the social worker’s authority when making
recommendations?
A. Agency employment
B. Professional expertise
C. Organizational structure
85. A mother seeks treatment with a social worker due to her 9-year-old
daughter’s behavior. The child has refused to go to school due to
unwillingness to be separated from her mother and is falling behind
in her schoolwork. The situation has caused stress within the family
and the woman reports that she will likely be fired due to being
preoccupied with her daughter’s problems while at work. The
mother feels hopeless and frustrated. The social worker’s MOST
appropriate intervention is to:
A. Suggest that the woman explain the reasons for her recent
behavior to her employer
B. Acknowledge that hopelessness and frustration are common in
these situations
C. Teach the woman ways to cope while addressing the causes of
her daughter’s behavior
794
86. Which of the following findings on social development is the BEST
justification for mainstreaming children with unique learning needs?
A. Peer relationships depend on inhibiting impulses and
understanding cause–effect relationships
B. Peer acceptance is affected by family support, parental
interactions, and sibling relationships
C. Peer friendships are protective factors from psychological
problems and promote self-image
87. A client who has been chronically depressed is prescribed a
selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor by his psychiatrist. He feels
much more hopeful with many of his unhappy thoughts dissipating.
The client reports that his relationship with his wife has improved,
but he has recently been experiencing erectile dysfunction which
has made sexual intercourse difficult. Which of the following is
MOST likely the cause of this dysfunction?
A. Relationship problems that were masked by his depression
B. A side effect of his antidepressant medication
C. Biological changes that are typical as men age
88. A social worker is observing to determine if the frequency of a high-
rate behavior has declined due to operant conditioning. Which of
the following is the MOST significant concern about using this
approach?
A. Observation is a very costly method of data collection
B. The client is in the presence of the social worker for part of the
day
C. Some behaviors do not lend themselves to observational study
89. A social worker is meeting with a third-grade boy who is struggling
in school. Despite his poor grades, his parents seem disinterested
in assisting him with his schoolwork. He is frustrated by his
academic performance, but he does not know how to do better.
Which psychosocial problem is the boy MOST likely to experience
if this situation is not addressed?
A. Mistrust
795
B. Guilt
C. Inferiority
90. Which of the following consent procedures BEST informs clients of
the nature and expectations of the social worker/client relationship?
A. Discussing written policies throughout the problem-solving
process
B. Asking clients to sign written consent forms prior to initial
meetings
C. Ensuring that written policies are updated regularly and signed
by clients
91. In object relations theory, which of the following occurs when two
contradictory thoughts or feelings cannot be tolerated
simultaneously, causing only one to be recognized at a time?
A. Isolation
B. Resistance
C. Splitting
92. Which role does a family member assume when aiming to draw
attention away from addiction in a family unit?
A. Enabler
B. Mascot
C. Scapegoat
93. For which disorder do children with disruptive mood dysregulation
disorder (DMDD) often meet the diagnostic criteria?
A. Oppositional defiant disorder
B. Bipolar disorder
C. Autism spectrum disorder
94. A school social worker learns that the academic needs of a new
student can be adequately met in either the regular classroom with
additional supports or a separate resource room for students who
require special assistance. The parents would like their child to
796
remain with his friends in the classroom, but the guidance counselor
feels strongly that the student would be better served in a resource
room for at least part of the day. In this situation, the social worker
should:
A. Meet with the child to determine whether there is a preference
about the settings offered
B. Suggest ways to maintain friendships while the child receives
instruction in a resource room
C. Advocate for the child to receive any supports needed in the
regular classroom
95. After completing an assessment, a social worker diagnoses a client
with binge eating disorder. Which of the following will be MOST
effective in treating the client for this condition?
A. Psychoanalysis
B. Task-centered treatment
C. Cognitive behavioral therapy
96. A social worker in a hospital emergency department meets with an
elderly client who demonstrates significant memory and cognitive
loss. In order to differentiate whether these impairments are due to
major neurocognitive disorder or delirium, which of the following
should the social worker assess?
A. Symptom progression from first onset
B. Severity of memory loss
C. Impact on all areas of adaptive functioning
97. When completing a functional behavioral assessment, a social
worker should FIRST:
A. Determine why an intervention is needed
B. Identify antecedents which are hypothesized to cause the
behavior
C. Define a problem behavior in measurable terms
98. Which of the following factors often threatens social workers having
shared power with clients?
797
A. Social workers view issues more objectively than clients
B. Most services are delivered in agency-based settings
C. Clients may need immediate assistance from social workers to
address their problems
99. A client is having trouble achieving a treatment goal, so the social
worker breaks it down into small successive steps and rewards the
client after achieving each one. Which behavioral technique is the
social worker utilizing with this client?
A. Biofeedback
B. Modeling
C. Shaping
100. During the first meeting, a client whose spouse has recently died
tells the social worker that she is just now accepting the reality of
the death. Understanding the mourning process, the social worker
can expect the client to:
A. Move sequentially through the stages of grief towards
acceptance
B. Need more time before talking about the loss
C. Require the support of others to enhance her capacity for healing
101. A social worker recently terminated with a client who made
substantial progress in managing her anxiety. The former client
has been asked by her church to facilitate a peer support group
for others who have experienced similar problems. The former
client is nervous about this request and asks the social worker to
be a co-facilitator. The social worker feels that the former client
would benefit from this peer interaction. In this situation, the social
worker should:
A. Assist with helping prepare for, but not co-facilitate, the group
B. Help co-facilitate for several sessions until the former client feels
more comfortable
C. Encourage participation while declining the request to co-
facilitate
798
102. A school social worker who is facilitating a group for adolescents
notices that one member who recently immigrated with her family
from Japan interacts very little during most of the sessions. In
order to meet this client’s needs, the social worker should:
A. Suggest that meeting individually may be more appropriate to
facilitate expression of feelings
B. Determine class participation to see if this behavior occurs in
other settings
C. Create ongoing varied opportunities for interaction by all group
members
103. During an initial session, a client appears reluctant to speak and
states, “I am not sure if this is going to work out.” In this situation,
the BEST course of action for the social worker is to:
A. Clarify what can be expected, including the roles of the social
worker and client
B. Inform the client that treatment will be focused in achieving
desired outcomes
C. Ask about other situations in which the client has felt this way
104. A young man who has a criminal history for violent acts later
becomes an acclaimed boxer. Which of the following defense
mechanisms is the client MOST likely exhibiting?
A. Introjection
B. Sublimation
C. Undoing
105. Which of the following is the BEST definition of conversion?
A. Therapeutic process aimed at turning negative thoughts directed
at others into positive ones
B. Defense mechanism in which a repressed urge is expressed by
disturbance of a body function
C. Strategy used in family therapy to get consensus among those
with divergent viewpoints
799
106. A social worker is serving an elderly woman who has recently
experienced declining health due to aging and loss due to the
deaths of several close friends. She has missed several
appointments due to illness and states that she is not participating
in many of her of prior community activities as she is too tired to
do so. In order to determine if the client is in crisis, the social
worker should:
A. Review her most recent physical evaluation to determine the
severity of her health problems
B. Conduct an interview with her to gather subjective data on recent
life events and changes
C. Obtain information from collaterals to get a better understanding
of her current functioning
107. To be diagnosed with cyclothymic disorder, how long does an
adult need to experience mood cycling?
A. 2 years
B. 6 months
C. 12 months
108. Which of the following types of events are MOST significantly
associated with emotional or psychological trauma?
A. Events that occur in adulthood
B. Events that happen unexpectedly without warning
C. Events that can be prevented
109. A family seeks counseling as their adolescent daughter recently
ran away from home. During the first session, the daughter states
her parents do not care about her well-being and are overly
concerned with meeting their job demands. She feels that all
interactions with them are contentious and end in arguments. The
mother admits to feeling overwhelmed by daily life and
disconnected from both her husband and her daughter at times.
The father feels that the root of the problem is that the daughter
has been given too much control in the household. Using a
structural family therapy approach, the social worker should:
800
A. Assess whether the current state of the mother requires
immediate attention due to a risk of self-harm
B. Instruct the daughter to discuss with her parents a current
concern that she has that she feels they are not addressing
C. Determine when each family member’s concerns began in an
attempt to determine the etiology of the problem
110. When social workers engage in peer supervision, which of the
following is the primary method for learning?
A. Modeling
B. Positive reinforcement
C. Formative feedback
111. A social worker is developing a contract with a client who has
been mandated for treatment. Which of the following actions by
the social worker would be MOST helpful in promoting client’s
self-determination?
A. Explaining directives contained in the court order to the client
B. Advocating for clinically appropriate modifications to mandates
C. Eliciting input from the client about the methods of intervention to
be used
112. At the conclusion of the sixth session, a client states that her
attorney would like to speak to the social worker. When the social
worker asks about the nature of the request, the client states that
she does not know the reason and the social worker will need to
contact the attorney to find out. The social worker should FIRST:
A. Contact the attorney with assurance that all legal matters will be
discussed with the client in future sessions
B. Decline the request until the social worker’s role is clarified and
client expectations are understood
C. Arrange a time for the client to be present during the social
worker–attorney conversation to ensure transparency about what
is disclosed
113. During the first session, a client blames the recent termination
801
from his job for many of his other problems. He reports that his
girlfriend ended their relationship as she was angry that he was
fired. He also had to move in with a relative as he could no longer
afford his rent. He reports feeling like a failure and does not know
“how things got so bad.” The BEST response by the social worker
is to:
A. Identify which problem is the top priority so it can be targeted for
immediate assistance
B. Assure him that many people lose their jobs and experience
similar feelings
C. Explore the reasons for his termination in order to get at the root
cause of the problem
114. A social worker, who is counseling a couple, learns that the
husband has recently been diagnosed with a rare medical
condition that is being treated with medication. The wife reports
that this medication causes dramatic mood changes, which she
has witnessed. Due to a lack of knowledge about this medical
condition and the medication prescribed, the social worker
contacts a physician for consultation. Which of the following
concepts is the basis of the social worker’s action?
A. Interdisciplinary collaboration
B. Coordinated service delivery
C. Standard of care
115. Which of the following statements is accurate about the blending
and braiding of resources in human service programs?
A. Federal categorical limitations make blending and braiding of
resources difficult to administer
B. Braiding of resources is seen as advantageous by administrators
due to ease of implementation
C. Blending and braiding of resources allows collective reporting on
how monies are spent overall
116. A client reports that she is very upset by her 17-year-old
daughter’s behavior. She has not been completing her homework
and is showing up late for her classes. The client reports that she
802
recently took away her daughter’s cell phone until her behavior
changes. Which of the following behavioral techniques is the client
using with her daughter?
A. Negative reinforcement
B. Positive punishment
C. Negative punishment
117. When an agency receives a single disbursement for services
provided by two or more providers during a single episode of care
or over a specific time period, which payment methodology is
being employed?
A. Capitation
B. Fee-for-service
C. Bundled payment
118. A client who is planning on ending her marriage comes from a
culture in which divorce is strictly prohibited. The client has a poor
self-image due to years of feeling a duty to stay married despite
being unhappy. In order to be most effective, the social worker
should:
A. Use universalization when speaking with the client about her
situation
B. Help the client identify the steps needed for her to achieve her
goal
C. Explore why the client wants to end her marriage now
119. A social worker whose client engages in heavy alcohol
consumption notices that he has confusion, problems with muscle
coordination, drowsiness, and memory loss which persist even
when he has not been drinking. Which of the following BEST
treats these symptoms which are associated with his alcoholism?
A. Thiamine injections
B. Cognitive rehabilitation
C. Physical therapy
120. A social worker is providing counseling to a client who is having
803
trouble in her workplace. The client feels isolated as she does not
have any meaningful collegial relationships in her job. The client,
who is lesbian, feels that her support system is limited to her
partner with whom she has been living for the past 2 years. At the
end of a session, the client gives the social worker a hug while
thanking her for understanding the situation. The social worker,
who has a policy not to have physical contact with her clients,
hesitates, which causes the client to accuse the social worker of
being homophobic. In this situation, the social worker should:
A. Ask the client why the action is being viewed as homophobic
B. Explain the reasons for the rule about not touching clients
C. Provide assurance that the response was not meant to be
homophobic
121. A social worker is reviewing referral information for a new client
which identifies him as xenophobic. Which of the following tasks
should be the focus of the social worker’s initial interaction to help
the client address this fear?
A. Exploring the benefits of his interaction with those who are
younger
B. Managing the anxiety which results from his physical contact
with others
C. Understanding his aversion to those from other countries and
their cultures
122. Which category of DSM disorders includes gambling disorder?
A. Obsessive-compulsive and related disorders
B. Disruptive, impulse-control, and conduct disorders
C. Substance-related and addictive disorders
123. In the provision of mental health counseling, the primary purpose
of social workers’ case notes is to:
A. Serve as documentation so supervisors can evaluate worker
performance and skill
B. Provide evidence of service receipt for reimbursement by third-
party insurers
804
C. Ensure continuity of care as well as a means by which to
evaluate client progress
124. The goal of a client with terminal cancer is to receive hospice
services at home. Her health has deteriorated rapidly, but the
social worker is having difficulty finding an appropriate provider
due to the complexity of the client’s medical condition and her
current living situation. In order to meet the needs of the client,
which social work value is MOST critical when intervening?
A. Dignity and worth of the person
B. Competence
C. Social justice
125. A social worker at an outpatient treatment program observes a
court-mandated client who is being treated for alcohol use
disorder become outraged during a group session when leniency
for those arrested for addiction-related offenses is discussed. The
client states that severe punishment, as opposed to treatment
options, must be required. This behavior surprises the social
worker as the client has repeatedly expressed his appreciation for
being offered treatment in lieu of imprisonment. Based on this
behavior, which of the following defense mechanisms is the client
MOST likely exhibiting?
A. Projection
B. Displacement
C. Reaction formation
126. When evaluating the effectiveness of treatment, which technique
statistically controls, on a post hoc basis, for differences between
nonequivalent groups on outcomes of interest?
A. Random sampling
B. Case-mix adjustment
C. Descriptive analyses
127. A social worker is working with a client who is attending an adult
medical day program. Staff report that her hygiene has
805
deteriorated and she is increasingly disoriented. She has a visiting
nurse coming to her home to administer her medications on the
evenings when her adult son, with whom she lives, works outside
the home. After a stroke several months ago, she began getting
home-delivered meals. The client requires constant supervision
while in the day program and the social worker is concerned about
her current safety. Which collateral source will be MOST helpful in
making this assessment?
A. The client’s adult son
B. The client herself
C. The agency staff who are providing direct and ancillary services
128. Which of the statements describes why fee splitting is considered
unethical in social work practice?
A. Fee splitting represents a conflict of interest which can adversely
impact client care
B. Fee splitting creates prohibited dual relationships which are
boundary violations
C. Fee splitting occurs without client consent which is mandatory for
all treatment decisions
129. A mother and her adult son with developmental disabilities meet
with a social worker for assistance in helping the young man move
into his own apartment. While both the mother and son would like
this move to occur, they have concerns as he will need support to
meet his daily living needs, as well as attend to ongoing medical
issues. The social worker recommends an interdisciplinary team
approach to service planning. The FIRST step in this process
should be to:
A. Complete a biopsychosocial history to inform planning
B. Develop a timeline for the problem-solving process to help
structure decision making
C. Identify areas of anticipated support to identify skills needed of
team members
130. A former client contacts a social worker and requests a copy of
806
her record. The social worker asks about the reason for the
request, but no explanation is provided. While the social worker is
not worried about the client seeing the information in the record,
the social worker is concerned about the client sharing the
documents with others as the record contains sensitive
information about the client’s history. The social worker should:
A. Send a copy of the entire record to the client
B. Meet with the client to determine if the client will explain the
reason for the request
C. Ask the client to put the request in writing prior to making a
decision
131. Which approach focuses on well-being and happiness through
cultivation of meaningful experiences?
A. Psychoanalysis
B. Positive psychology
C. Psychoeducation
132. Which statement BEST describes a difference between values
and ethics?
A. Values are unwritten personal belief systems while ethics are
written rules or regulations that guide professional behavior
B. Values are principles which guide behavior while ethics dictate
whether this behavior is appropriate based on a moral code of
conduct
C. Values are individual standards of conduct which are stable over
time while ethics vary based on cultural changes and advances
133. Which cognitive developmental stage is characterized by magical
thinking?
A. Concrete operations
B. Preoperational
C. Formal operations
134. Which criterion must be present for a social worker to diagnose a
child with gender dysphoria?
807
A. Dislike of one’s sexual anatomy
B. Desire to be the other gender or belief that one is the other
gender
C. Preference for clothing and playmates of the other gender
135. Which of the following statements accurately describes the
appropriateness of including assessment and service provision
descriptions in client discharge plans?
A. Reasons for admission should not be incorporated, but
descriptions of treatment must be contained in client discharge
plans
B. Both reasons for admission and services provided must be
included in client discharge plans
C. Client discharge plans should include reasons for admission, but
not descriptions of treatment provided
136. Which nonverbal technique used in social work practice primarily
aims to gain rapport at the unconscious level?
A. Clarifying
B. Mirroring
C. Reframing
137. A counseling agency charges the same amount to all clients
enrolled in its group treatment program. Given a recent bequest,
the board of directors proposes providing a standard subsidy to all
group therapy clients to reduce their fees by a set amount. A
social worker in the agency advocates for these subsidies to be
proportional, with clients having the lowest incomes receiving the
highest subsidies. The social worker argues that some clients can
afford to pay the actual cost while those who have lower incomes
cannot and should receive the subsidies. Which of the following is
the basis of the social worker’s recommendation for resource
allocation?
A. Equity
B. Equality
C. Fidelity
808
138. A hospital social worker is meeting with a 54-year-old man who
was admitted after police found him walking in the middle of the
highway intoxicated. An assessment reveals that the client has
tried unsuccessfully to reduce his drinking for many years, most
recently after his wife left him. His marital problems stemmed from
being fired from work due to excessive absenteeism related to his
alcohol use. The client admits to spending most of his time
drinking or thinking about drinking and often drinks more than he
intends. According to the DSM, which of the following is the
BEST diagnosis for this client?
A. Alcohol intoxication
B. Alcohol dependence
C. Alcohol use disorder, severe
139. A social worker is interested in determining the impact of culture
and race on self-image using an ethnographic approach. Which of
the following would be the BEST method for this inquiry?
A. Participant observation
B. Experimental design
C. Self-administered questionnaires
140. Which of the following social work core values supports
unconditional positive regard?
A. Importance of human relationships
B. Self-determination
C. Dignity and worth of the person
141. Which of the following is a defining characteristic of dyspareunia?
A. Pain that occurs during sexual intercourse
B. Short-term memory loss due to brain damage
C. Urinary incontinence associated with age-related muscular
changes
142. At which age does object permanence typically develop?
A. 18 months
809
B. 8 months
C. 3 years
143. A social worker is providing counseling to a couple who are
experiencing communication problems in their marriage. During a
session, the wife becomes angry as she states that she never
gets to speak or express her opinions. The social worker
comments that the wife has done almost all the talking during the
weekly sessions to date. Which of the following interviewing
techniques is the social worker employing?
A. Confrontation
B. Interpretation
C. Clarification
144. A client tells a social worker that he needs help managing his
anxiety as it is interfering with both his professional and personal
lives. He states that he has had problems with anxiety throughout
his life, but his anxiety has become worse lately. The client reports
feeling overwhelmed and wanting to change but does not know
where to start. The social worker should FIRST:
A. Determine what informal or formal treatments have been tried in
the past
B. Provide cognitive behavioral therapy to replace unhelpful,
anxiety-producing thoughts
C. Identify any risk for self-harm due to the report of being
overwhelmed
145. A social worker has been working with an 8-year-old girl for over a
year. The client’s mother, who is going through a divorce, states
that she is going to ask if the social worker can be appointed to
supervise visits with the father. The need for supervised visitation
has already been determined by the court. The mother feels
strongly that the social worker is the best choice given the
presence of a strong relationship with the child. The social worker
should:
A. Inform the mother that this additional role is not permitted
B. Determine the child’s feelings about the mother’s request since
810
the child is the client
C. Request to meet with the father to determine if he is comfortable
with the arrangement
146. When engaging in reflective listening, a social worker should:
A. Anticipate what should be said next to move clients through the
therapeutic process
B. Reconstruct what clients are thinking and feeling through verbal
and nonverbal methods
C. Help clients understand social work responsibilities in the
problem-solving process
147. The primary goal of interdisciplinary service collaboration is to:
A. Address the holistic needs of clients across life domains
B. Develop innovative strategies for addressing social problems
C. Increase the effectiveness of assistance provided to clients
148. A 22-year-old woman meets with a social worker due to her
excessive fear of heights. During the assessment, the client states
that she avoided climbing trees and other activities which raised
her above the ground when she was a child. Recently, she has
been unable to fly in planes and drive over bridges, causing the
client to be restricted in her travels. The client is upset as she
spends a great deal of time worrying about whether she will need
to cross a bridge, causing her to sweat, breath heavily, and feel
anxious throughout the day. During a recent visit with her
physician, she was prescribed medication for this condition. Which
medication was MOST likely recommended for the client?
A. Ativan
B. Risperdal
C. Tegretol
149. A social worker formats client records into distinct sections
representing all relevant information, issues to be addressed, and
activities that need to be undertaken, respectively. Which model of
recording is this social worker MOST likely using?
811
A. SOAP
B. DAP
C. APIE
150. A social worker is approached by a group therapy client who is
concerned about the confidentiality of information that he would
like to share during the next session. The social worker should:
A. Inform the client that information disclosed during meetings will
be kept private unless it involves danger to himself or others
B. Ask the client about the nature of the disclosure so that
appropriate guidance can be given as to whether it should be
shared
C. Inform the client that confidentiality cannot be guaranteed as
group members are not legally prohibited from disclosing
information that is learned
151. A client has been approved for six sessions with a social worker
by his insurance company. In formulating treatment goals, the
client articulates changes which the social worker does not feel
are achievable in the time frame approved. The social worker
should:
A. Inform the client that more feasible goals must be developed
B. Advocate for the insurance company to authorize additional
sessions
C. Respect the client’s right to self-determination by working toward
the client’s desired changes
152. A social worker is working in a cultural community in which
bartering is the accepted practice for obtaining goods and
services. For the social worker to accept goods from clients for the
provision of services, which of the following criterion must be met?
A. Clients must demonstrate that these arrangements will not be
detrimental.
B. Bartering must be essential for the provision of services.
C. Social workers must initiate the request for bartering
arrangements.
812
153. According to family systems theory, in which types of relationships
does blame for the dynamics rest with specific individuals?
A. Parent–child
B. Abusive
C. Adulterous
154. A social worker who is seeing a client for the first time asks the
client how she would like to be addressed. Which of the following
is demonstrated by the social worker’s action?
A. Cultural sensitivity
B. Professional boundaries
C. Practitioner objectivity
155. A social worker proposes a pilot program for youth with substance
use problems to determine whether an intervention which has
been highly effective with adults has similar results with children.
The social worker wants to examine whether outcomes can be
generalized to younger age groups before offering the service to
all minors in the agency. Which of the following concerns does the
pilot program hope to address?
A. Internal validity
B. Reliability
C. External validity
156. Which of the following is classified as an anxiety disorder in the
DSM?
A. Obsessive-compulsive disorder
B. Acute stress disorder
C. Separation anxiety disorder
157. A social worker is counseling a middle-aged client who regrets
spending most of his time during his adult life building a business.
He blames this decision for preventing him from getting married
and having children. The client would like to spend more time
focused on hobbies that he abandoned due to his work schedule
but does not know how to make this change. With which stage of
813
psychosocial development does the client appear to be
struggling?
A. Generativity versus stagnation
B. Industry versus inferiority
C. Initiative versus guilt
158. After determining that an ethical dilemma exists, a social worker
should NEXT:
A. Seek supervision to determine which agency policies impact on
the situation
B. Prioritize the ethical values which must be used to choose
correct courses of action
C. Weigh the issues in light of key social work values and principles
159. Which of the following is the evidence-based treatment for alcohol
withdrawal?
A. Psychopharmacology
B. Self-help group participation
C. Cognitive behavioral therapy
160. Which of the following BEST defines the concept of privilege
when referring to client privacy?
A. Legal rule that protects communications from compelled
disclosure in court proceedings
B. Mandate to obtain written consent from clients when information
is to be disclosed
C. Requirement to keep treatment information of minors confidential
even from their parents
161. A primary purpose of a forensic interview with a child who has
been a victim of child abuse or neglect is to:
A. Identify emotional and psychological strengths to be used in
successfully coping with abuse and trauma
B. Determine the occurrence of abuse or trauma based on
information that can be used for prosecution of perpetrators
814
C. Assess whether abuse or trauma has led to the perpetration of
violent acts against others
162. Which of the following is not considered a deficiency need?
A. Self-actualization
B. Safety
C. Esteem
163. Which of the following actions by a social worker is considered
unethical according to the professional code of ethics?
A. Charging rates which are significantly higher than those of other
colleagues for the same services based on professional
experience and training
B. Soliciting private fees for providing services which are available
through the social worker’s employer or agency
C. Terminating services to clients who are not paying overdue
balances after financial contractual arrangements have been
made clear
164. A social worker at an inpatient psychiatric unit is reviewing an
intake assessment completed on a 21-year-old college student
who was admitted the previous day due to bizarre behaviors. He
was brought to the emergency department by the police who
responded to student concerns about him yelling in an agitated
voice, even though there was no one nearby. When asked about
his actions, the client stated that he was being monitored by a
deadly chip implanted in his brain by evil aliens. When contacted,
his parents reported that they began to worry about him 8 months
ago due to the presence of some unusual behaviors, but their
concerns grew in the last 2 months when he stopped attending
classes altogether. The social worker sees that the client was
examined by the psychiatrist upon intake and medication was
prescribed. Due to these symptoms, which medication is the client
MOST likely going to be prescribed?
A. Lithium
B. Prozac
C. Clozaril
815
165. A woman comes to see a social worker as she does not want to
cause conflict in her marriage, but she is very unhappy. She has a
preschool child and would like to return to working outside her
home. The client reports that she misses working in the company
that she left shortly before giving birth. She states that her
husband’s family comes from a culture which strictly forbids such
employment. Which of the following is MOST likely the basis of
this problem?
A. Role conflict
B. Cultural bias
C. Social injustice
166. Which of the following is MOST commonly the cause of
“doorknob disclosures”?
A. Premature closure of inquiry by social workers when doing
biopsychosocial assessments
B. Fear and embarrassment by clients about information provided
C. Perceived power imbalance by clients within therapeutic
relationships
167. A mother comes with her 4-year-old daughter to a social worker
as her husband is receiving hospice and she is worried about the
child’s reaction to his death in the coming weeks. The mother has
many questions about the child’s ability to comprehend what will
happen. Based on developmental theories, which of the following
BEST describes how the client will likely view death?
A. A comforting experience which should not be feared
B. A temporary state which can be reversed at any time
C. A permanent condition which is caused by accidents and factors
that cannot be controlled
168. According to the professional code of ethics, social workers who
need to report suspected abuse should:
A. Inform clients about the need to report and potential actions
which may result before any disclosures are made
816
B. Seek supervision to determine that agency policies about
informing clients are appropriately followed
C. Refrain from telling clients about the need to report and reasons
for reporting in order to protect the integrity of abuse
investigations
169. A social worker employed in an agency setting receives a referral
for a former girlfriend who he has not seen in 20 years. The client
is Spanish speaking and the social worker is the only staff
linguistically competent to provide clinical services in Spanish. In
order to act ethically in this situation, the social worker should:
A. Speak to his supervisor to disclose the prior relationship before
meeting with the client
B. Inform agency personnel that he cannot provide services to the
client
C. Schedule an intake given the time that has passed since the
prior relationship
170. For which diagnoses is brief cognitive behavior therapy MOST
appropriate?
A. Substance use disorders
B. Dissociative disorders
C. Adjustment disorders
817
Practice Test
Answers
1. A. A flashback is an indicator of trauma that is characterized as
reexperiencing a previous traumatic experience as if it were actually
happening in that moment. It includes reactions that often resemble the
client’s reactions during the trauma. Flashback experiences are very brief
and typically last only a few seconds, but the emotional aftereffects linger
for hours or longer. Flashbacks are commonly initiated by a trigger, but not
necessarily. Sometimes, they occur out of the blue. Other times specific
physical states increase vulnerability to reexperiencing a trauma (e.g.,
fatigue, high stress levels). Flashbacks can feel like a brief movie scene
that intrudes on the client. Other ways people reexperience trauma,
besides flashbacks, are via nightmares and intrusive thoughts of the
trauma. During flashbacks, clients need to focus on what is happening in
the here and now, which is accomplished using grounding techniques.
Social workers should be prepared to help the client get regrounded so
that the client can distinguish between what is happening now versus
what had happened in the past.
There are lots of grounding techniques, but the best are those that use
the five senses (sound, touch, smell, taste, and sight) as they bring
attention to the present moment; for example, turning on loud music
(sound), feeling something cold or comforting (touch), sniffing a strong
pleasant fragrance (smell), and so on. Social workers should also offer
education about the experience of triggers and flashbacks, and then
normalize these events as common traumatic stress reactions.
Afterward, some clients need to discuss the experience and understand
why the flashback or trigger occurred. It is often helpful for a client to
draw a connection between the trigger and the traumatic event(s). This
can be a preventive strategy whereby the client can anticipate that a
given situation places the client at higher risk for retraumatization and
requires use of coping strategies, including seeking support.
818
While all of the response choices are helpful for survivors of trauma, the
aim of grounding techniques is immediate assistance to get clients back
to the “here and now.” The incorrect response choices involve “talk” or
psychotherapy by understanding or teaching. Incorrect response
choices also do not address that clients are “experiencing flashbacks of
past traumatic events,” but instead deal with the impacts of or
responses to trauma more broadly. Only the correct answer deals with
orienting the client to the present, which is necessary when flashbacks
occur.
Question Assesses
Assessment, Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning
2. C. Each culture has its own traditions, rituals, and ways of expressing
grief and mourning. The effects of culture, race, and ethnicity on
behaviors, attitudes, and identity should be considered. Almost every
religion or culture has its own traditions involving mourning. Grief is the
thoughts and feelings associated with loss, while mourning is the outward
behaviors that represent a person’s grief. Every culture has its own
traditions regarding mourning, and it is important for people to realize that
everyone mourns differently and that there is no right way to mourn. While
social workers cannot be expected to know the mourning ceremonies and
traditions of each client’s culture, understanding some basics about how
different cultures may prepare for and respond to death is important.
Though difficult to ask, there are crucial questions that need to be part of
conversations between social workers and clients. For example:
■ What are the cultural rituals for coping with dying, the deceased pers
body, the final arrangements for the body, and honoring the death?
■ What are the family’s beliefs about what happens after death?
■ What does the client consider to be the roles of each family membe
handling the death?
■ Are certain types of death less acceptable (e.g., suicide) or are ce
types of death especially hard to handle for that culture (e.g., the deat
a child—in countries with high infant mortality, there may be diffe
attitudes about the loss of children)?
Clients should be viewed as a source of knowledge about their
special/cultural needs and norms—but social workers sometimes are at
a loss about what to ask under such trying circumstances. While there
819
are many similarities across cultures, such as wearing black as a sign of
mourning, there are always exceptions. The mix of cultural/religious
attitudes and behaviors surrounding death and dying can become very
complex indeed. And when a death occurs, some clients break with
tradition entirely, often creating chaos within families.
The question contains a qualifying word—MOST. The client’s behavior
may be psychotic, placing her at risk for self-harm. It also may be typical
given the client’s cultural practices and religious beliefs. In order to best
understand these actions, the social worker should ask the client about
her mourning rituals.
Question Assesses
Human Development, Diversity, and Behavior in the Environment
3. C. Human genetics is the study of inheritance as it occurs in humans.
Genetic testing can confirm or rule out suspected genetic conditions or
help determine clients’ chances of developing or passing on genetic
disorders. This process can be very stressful for clients, and it is important
that social workers have knowledge about the benefits, as well as the
limitations and risks, of genetic testing. Social workers can help clients
weigh the pros and cons of the test and discuss the social and emotional
aspects of testing.
Every person carries two copies of most genes (one copy from the
mother and one from the father). A carrier is a person who has a
change in one copy of a gene. The carrier does not have the genetic
disease related to the abnormal gene. A carrier can pass this abnormal
gene to a child. Carrier identification is a type of genetic testing that can
determine whether clients who have a family history of a specific
disease, or who are in a group that has a greater chance of having a
disease, are likely to pass that disease to their children. Information
from this type of testing can guide a couple’s decision about having
children.
For many genetic disorders, carrier testing can help determine how
likely it is that a child will have the disease:
■ If both parents carry the abnormal gene, there is a one-in-four (2
chance that their child will have the disease and a two-in-four (5
chance that their child will be a carrier of the disease (but will not have
820
There is also a one-in-four (25%) chance that the child will not get
abnormal gene and so will not have the disease nor be a carrier.
■ If only one parent carries the abnormal gene, the child has a one-in
(50%) chance of being a carrier but almost no chance of having
disease.
The question asks about an appropriate role for a social worker when a
client has FIRST learned information through genetic testing. The client
is a woman who was recently married. It would not be appropriate to
meet with the husband initially as there is no indication, in the scenario,
that the client wants a joint session to occur, and the couple is not the
client. While the client is anxious and upset, her feelings may result
from not understanding that her children will not automatically contract
the disease. The client needs information about the potential likelihood
that her children would be carriers or have the disease. This information
may alleviate some of her fears. Knowing whether the husband is also a
carrier is critical information which may not yet be known and/or is not
provided in the scenario. Anxiety and depression are the symptoms, not
the root of the problem, which is a lack of understanding. Providing
education is a critical social work task when clients are deciding to have
genetic testing and interpreting its results.
Question Assesses
Human Development, Diversity, and Behavior in the Environment
4. B. Therapy requires recognizing a client as part of a family system.
Additionally, it focuses on studying the role that a client has in a family
dynamic. Sometimes client problems arise due to dysfunctional
communication within the family. Disturbed communication in families
resulted in enormous pressure being felt by one or more members of that
family system.
A double bind is a dilemma in communication in which an individual (or
group) receives two or more conflicting messages, with one message
negating the other; this is a situation in which successfully responding to
one message means failing with the other and vice versa, so that the
person will automatically be put in the wrong regardless of response.
And the person can neither comment on the conflict, nor resolve it, nor
opt out of the situation. Contradictory messages result in the “victim”
feeling powerless and trapped in a “damned if you do and damned if
you don’t” double bind.
821
A paradoxical directive involves prescribing the very symptom the client
wants to resolve. It is often equated with reverse psychology. The
underlying principle is that a client engages in a behavior for a reason,
which is typically to meet a need (rebellion, attention, a cry for help, and
so on). In prescribing the symptom, a social worker helps a client
understand this need and determine how much control (if any) the client
has over the symptom. By choosing to manifest the symptom, a client
may recognize that the client can create it, and therefore has the power
to stop or change it.
A negative feedback loop is information that flows back into the family
system to minimize deviation and continue functioning within prescribed
limits. It helps to maintain homeostasis or keep things stable or the
same over time.
This is a recall question which relies on social workers understanding
communication patterns within families so that they can assist in
addressing them when they interfere with effective functioning. Often
roles within family units can be identified through assessing both verbal
and nonverbal communication. Much of social work intervention focuses
on helping clients with enhancing their expressive and receptive
communication skills.
Question Assesses
Psychotherapy, Clinical Interventions, and Case Management
5. A. When a client has experienced multiple, severe forms of trauma, the
psychological results are often multiple and severe as well; this
phenomenon is sometimes referred to as complex posttraumatic
disturbance. Complex trauma can be defined as a combination of early
and late-onset, multiple, and sometimes highly invasive traumatic events,
usually of an ongoing, interpersonal nature. In most cases, such trauma
includes exposure to repetitive childhood sexual, physical, and/or
psychological abuse, often (although not always) in the context of
concomitant emotional neglect and harmful social environments. Complex
trauma has a dramatic impact on development and resulting emotional
dysregulation and the loss of safety, direction, and the ability to detect or
respond to danger cues—this often sets off a chain of events leading to
subsequent or repeated trauma exposure in adolescence and adulthood.
The impact of complex trauma includes anxiety and depression;
dissociation; relational, identity, and affect regulation disturbance;
822
cognitive distortions; somatization; “externalizing” behaviors such as
self-mutilation and violence; sexual disturbance; substance abuse;
eating disorders; susceptibility to revictimization; and traumatic
bereavement associated with loss of family members and other
significant attachment figures.
Clients who have experienced complex trauma may be diagnosed with
a range of disorders, and consequently treated with multiple
medications and therapies that are ultimately ineffective because they
fail to address the underlying problem and do not reflect a trauma-
informed approach to assessment and treatment. It is essential that
social workers perform comprehensive assessments that capture the
broad range of reactions. Thorough assessments should also carefully
date and track the various traumatic events so they can be linked with
developmental derailments. Treatment approaches that are limited to a
single modality (e.g., exposure therapy, cognitive therapy, or psychiatric
medication) may be less helpful—especially if the intervention is not
adapted to the specific psychological and cultural needs of a client.
Treatment should focus on:
■ Removal of and protection from the source of the trauma and/or abuse
■ Acknowledgement that recovery from the trauma is not trivial and
require significant time and effort
■ Acknowledgment of the trauma as real, important, and undeserved
■ Acknowledgment that the trauma came from something that was stron
than clients and therefore could not be avoided
■ Acknowledgment of the “complex” nature of trauma (trauma may have
to decisions that brought on additional, undeserved trauma)
■ Mourning for what has been lost and cannot be recovered
■ Placement in a supportive environment where clients can discover
are not alone and can receive validation for their successes and sup
through their struggles
While recovery from complex trauma is possible, it will require
significant time and effort. Additionally, not all that has been lost can be
recovered. Thus, the correct answer is the only accurate one about
treating clients with complex grief.
Question Assesses
823
Assessment, Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning
6. A. When evaluating agency programs, it is necessary to understand
different types of assessment and the terms used to describe them.
Outputs, outcomes, and impacts are often used interchangeably, but are
not the same.
Outputs are what are produced by programs. For instance, a training
program provides graduates. A homeless shelter creates filled beds.
Outputs are usually described with numbers. For instance, “96% of
available beds were filled” or “the training program graduated 96
individuals.” Outputs are measurable and readily determined. It is
tempting to stop with outputs because they are easy to produce as they
reflect the number of people served or meals distributed.
Outcomes are the effects programs produce on the people served or
issues addressed. For instance, the result of a training program might
be the number of graduates who get a job and keep it for a particular
period. An outcome is a change that occurred because of a program. It
is measurable and time limited, although it may take a while to
determine its full effect. Measuring outcomes requires a bigger
commitment of time and resources.
Impacts are the long-term or indirect effects of outcomes. Impacts are
hard to measure since they may or may not happen. They are what is
hoped that efforts will accomplish. For instance, graduating from a
training program may eventually lead to a better quality of life for the
individual.
This is a recall question about evaluation methods. Social workers are
required to know terms, as well as key concepts, related to each of the
KSAs. This scenario requires the ability to distinguish between an
output, outcome, and impact.
Question Assesses
Psychotherapy, Clinical Interventions, and Case Management
7. C. Benzodiazepines are psychotropic medications that help relieve
nervousness, tension, and other symptoms by slowing the central nervous
system. Benzodiazepines are a type of antianxiety drug. While anxiety is a
normal response to stressful situations, some clients have unusually high
levels of anxiety that can interfere with everyday life. For them,
824
benzodiazepines can help bring their feelings under control. The medicine
can also relieve troubling symptoms of anxiety, such as pounding
heartbeat, breathing problems, irritability, nausea, and faintness. They are
also sometimes prescribed for other conditions, such as muscle spasms,
epilepsy and other seizure disorders, phobias, panic disorder, withdrawal
from alcohol, and sleeping problems. The family of antianxiety drugs
known as benzodiazepines includes alprazolam (xanax), chlordiazepoxide
(librium), diazepam (valium), and lorazepam (ativan). These medicines
take effect fairly quickly, starting to work within an hour after they are
taken. Benzodiazepines are available only with a prescription and are
available in tablet, capsule, liquid, or injectable forms.
Prolixin is an antipsychotic medication used to treat hallucinations and
delusions.
Prozac is an antidepressant medication used to treat depression.
This is a recall question about benzodiazepines (commonly called
“tranquilizers”), which are useful for treating anxiety. They are highly
addictive, and their use is normally limited to a short-term, as-needed
basis. They need to be carefully controlled by prescribing physicians.
The examination requires social workers to be aware of the four major
types of psychotropic medications—antipsychotics, antidepressants,
mood stabilizers, and antianxiety drugs—and be able to identify some
common medications in each of these types. While it is possible to have
no medication questions on the examination as other KSAs under
assessment, diagnosis, and treatment planning are tested instead, it is
important to have some knowledge about psychotropic drugs. For
example, knowing which types of medications are commonly prescribed
for various diagnoses can be helpful.
Question Assesses
Assessment, Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning
8. C. There are two major forms of bipolar disorder—bipolar I and bipolar II
(also known as bipolar 1 and 2)—which are separate diagnoses with
significant differences between them. To be diagnosed with bipolar I, a
client must have had at least one manic episode. The manic episode may
be preceded by or followed by hypomanic or major depressive episodes.
Mania symptoms cause significant impairment in life and may require
hospitalization or trigger a break from reality (psychosis). To be diagnosed
825
with bipolar II disorder, a client must have had at least one major
depressive episode lasting at least 2 weeks and at least one hypomanic
episode lasting at least 4 days, but never had a manic episode. Major
depressive episodes or the unpredictable changes in mood and behavior
can cause distress or difficulty in areas of your life.
The most important distinction between bipolar I and II is that a client
with bipolar I has manic episodes while a client with bipolar II has
hypomanic episodes. The main difference between mania and
hypomania is a matter of severity. In the hypomania of bipolar II, a client
has a sustained mood that is elevated (heightened), expansive (grand,
superior), or irritable. This mood must be noticeably different from
normal mood when not depressed. In mania, that mood is extremely
abnormal, and is also combined with increased activity or energy that is
also abnormal. Examples of hypomania may include being exceptionally
cheerful, needing only 3 hours of sleep instead of the usual 7, spending
more money than can be afforded, and/or speaking far more rapidly
than usual. Hypomanic behavior is noticeably different from a client’s
own mood, but not outside the range of possible behavior in general.
Manic episodes may include being out-of-control happy even during
serious events, which is atypical behavior for anyone.
Someone with bipolar I disorder may also have hypomanic episodes,
but someone with bipolar II cannot ever have had a manic episode. If a
manic episode occurs in someone with bipolar II, the diagnosis will be
changed. However, the depressive episodes of bipolar II disorder are
often longer lasting and may be even more severe than in bipolar I
disorder. Therefore, bipolar II disorder is not simply a “milder” overall
form of bipolar I disorder.
At least one of the following conditions must exist in mania, but can’t be
present in hypomania:
■ Mania may include psychotic symptoms—delusions or hallucinati
Hypomania does not have psychotic symptoms. (However, a client
bipolar II may experience hallucinations or delusions during depres
episodes without the diagnosis changing to bipolar I.)
■ While hypomania may interfere to a degree with daily functioning, in m
day-to-day life is significantly impaired.
■ The manic person was hospitalized because of the severe symptoms.
826
In this question, only one response choice is an accurate statement,
and it is the primary difference between the disorders. Depressive
episodes of bipolar II disorder are often longer lasting and may be even
more severe than in bipolar I disorder. A client with bipolar II may
experience hallucinations or delusions during depressive episodes
without the diagnosis changing to bipolar I. Thus, all responses except
the correct answer are incorrect.
Question Assesses
Assessment, Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning
9. B. Competently conducting evaluations of practice requires skill and
knowledge. There are also many ethical considerations. Social workers
engaged in evaluation should obtain voluntary and written informed
consent from participants, when appropriate, without any implied or actual
deprivation or penalty for refusal to participate; without undue inducement
to participate; and with due regard for participants’ well-being, privacy, and
dignity. Informed consent should include information about the nature,
extent, and duration of the participation requested and disclosure of the
risks and benefits of participation in the research.
When evaluation or research participants are incapable of giving
informed consent (including due to being below the age of consent),
social workers should provide an appropriate explanation to the
participants, obtain the participants’ assent to the extent they are able,
and obtain written consent from those legally authorized to act on their
behalf.
This is a recall question which relies on social workers being fully
informed of ethical standards of evaluation and research. The correct
answer is that which is required for “the social worker to ethically
conduct the evaluation.” When questions concern ethical behavior, the
professional ethical standards should be remembered. Written consent
is necessary, but not sufficient, as the assent of the children is also
needed. Assent is a willingness to participate even though a child is not
legally able to provide authorization. Children are not able to provide
written consent as consent indicates authority to make legal decisions,
which those under the age of majority are not able to do unless
emancipated.
Question Assesses
827
Professional Values and Ethics
10. C. Social workers should handle issues surrounding the discharge and
termination of services very carefully. Clients whose services are
discharged or terminated unethically may not receive needed supports.
Once services are provided, social workers have legal and ethical
responsibilities to continue these services or properly refer clients to
alternative providers. While social workers do not have to work with all
those in need or requesting services, services cannot terminate abruptly
once therapeutic relationships have been established. Social workers
should take reasonable steps to avoid abandoning clients who are still
in need of services. Social workers should withdraw services
precipitously only under unusual circumstances, giving careful
consideration to all factors in the situation and taking care to minimize
possible adverse effects. Social workers should assist in making
appropriate arrangements for continuation of services when necessary.
When it is necessary to terminate services, social workers should
provide clients with names, addresses, and telephone numbers of
multiple appropriate referrals, if available. When feasible, they should
follow up with clients who have been terminated. If clients do not visit
the referrals, clients should be contacted about the risks involved with
the lack of follow.
Clients who will be terminated should be given as much advance notice
as possible. When clients announce their decision to terminate
prematurely, social workers should explain the risks involved and
provide suggestions for alternative care. All decisions and actions
related to termination of services should be documented in letters and
clients should be provided with clear written instructions to follow and
telephone numbers to use in the event of an emergency. Clients should
be asked to sign a copy of the documents, affirming that they received
the instructions and that the instructions were explained to them.
In instances involving court-ordered clients, social workers should seek
legal consultation and court approval before terminating services.
The correct answer involves direct action by the social worker to assist
with the referral and discharge process. Seeking consultation to review
what has already occurred may be helpful for professional development
after the situation has been resolved, but it will not directly help
reengage the client. Additionally, sending a letter is very passive and
there is no reason to believe that the client is not aware of the discharge
828
plan and contact information of the new provider. This action should
have been taken earlier in the referral process and will not be helpful
now. Meeting with the client to discuss issues that may have impacted
following through is an active response to address the situation. Central
to this contact can be an assessment of why the benefits of continuing
treatment have not compelled the client to make contact.
Question Assesses
Assessment, Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning
11. C. Social workers should be aware of models of supervision and
consultation, including those provided via contract. In situations in which
an agency may not have a clinical supervisor who meets the
qualifications of a supervisor, a social work supervisee may contract for
supervision services outside the agency. Supervisees should contact the
regulatory board in their jurisdictions in advance of contracting to confirm
if such a practice is permitted and confirm the documentation required
from the supervisor. The time frame required for the supervision period
should also be verified.
While it is important for agency staff and supervisors to agree with the
terms of the arrangement, there is not a need for contracts. Additionally,
having authorization from agency directors is important but the MOST
critical is having the consent of the clients. Clients need to understand
that their information is being shared with individuals outside of the
agency.
Question Assesses
Psychotherapy, Clinical Interventions, and Case Management
12. C. Clients with mental health disorders are more likely than clients
without mental health disorders to experience an alcohol or substance
use disorder. Co-occurring disorders can be difficult to diagnose due to
the complexity of symptoms, as both may vary in severity. In many
cases, clients may receive treatment for one disorder while the other
disorder remains untreated. This may occur because both mental and
substance use disorders can have biological, psychological, and social
components. Other reasons may be inadequate training or screening by
service providers, an overlap of symptoms, or that other health issues
need to be addressed first. In any case, the consequences of
undiagnosed, untreated, or undertreated co-occurring disorders can lead
829
to a higher likelihood of experiencing housing instability, incarceration,
medical illnesses, suicide, or even early death.
Clients with co-occurring disorders are best served through integrated
treatment. With integrated treatment, social workers can address
mental, and substance use disorders at the same time, often lowering
costs and creating better outcomes. Increasing awareness and building
capacity in service systems are important in helping identify and treat
co-occurring disorders. Early detection and treatment can improve
treatment outcomes and the quality of life for those who need these
services.
Prescribed medications play a key role in the treatment of many co-
occurring disorders. They can reduce symptoms and prevent relapses
of a psychiatric disorder. Medications can also help clients minimize
cravings and maintain abstinence from addictive substances.
Clients should make an informed choice about taking medications and
understand the potential benefits and costs associated with medication
use. In addition, they should take the medication as prescribed.
Taking medication is not substance abuse. Clients in recovery for a
substance use disorder may think it is wrong to take any medications.
However, a medication that manages clients’ moods is very different
from a drug that alters clients’ moods.
As co-occurring disorders are so prevalent, social workers should be
versed in their treatment. While not all clients with psychiatric
comorbidities need or receive psychotropic medications, the treatment
of mental health symptoms with medications can be effective in
reducing the severity of the symptomatology. Much research has been
done in this area. Further, it might reduce the elevated risk of suicide
attributed to each of the comorbid disorders and to their combined
effect. Reducing risk of suicide is an important aim of treatment.
Psychotropic medications should only be prescribed after clients
understand their side effects, but informed consent is not unique to only
those with co-occurring mental health and substance use disorders—
which makes it an incorrect response choice.
Question Assesses
Human Development, Diversity, and Behavior in the Environment
830
13. C. There are many models of supervision described in the literature,
ranging from traditional, authoritarian models to more collaborative
models. Different models of supervision place emphasis, in varying
degrees, on the client, the supervisor, the supervisee, or the context in
which the supervision takes place. Ideally, the supervisor and the
supervisee use a collaborative process when a supervision model is
selected; however, it is ultimately the responsibility of supervisors to
select the model that works best for the professional development of
supervisees.
Supervision encompasses several interrelated functions and
responsibilities. Each of these interrelated functions contributes to a
larger responsibility or outcome that ensures clients are protected and
that clients receive competent and ethical services. As a result,
supervision services received by the client are evaluated and adjusted,
as needed, to increase benefits. It is supervisors’ responsibilities to
ensure that supervisees provide competent, appropriate, and ethical
services.
Social workers should be knowledgeable about supervision models.
This question requires social workers to remember that supervisors are
responsible for the quality of services delivered by supervisees and their
ultimate benefit to clients. Ruling out administrators leaves supervisees
and supervisors as possible correct response choices. As the question
asks about “ultimate responsibility,” supervisors are distinguished from
the supervisees as they have authority in supervisory relationships.
While administrators have influence on service delivery, they are not
direct parties in supervisory relationships and their directives should
never be honored over those of supervisors.
Question Assesses
Psychotherapy, Clinical Interventions, and Case Management
14. C. Many programs use the ability to perform activities of daily living
(ADLs) and instrumental activities of daily living (IADLs) as eligibility
criteria to determine eligibility and/or level of care. Whether or not clients
are capable of performing these activities on their own or if they rely on
family caregivers to perform the ADLs can serve as a comparative
measure of their independence. Assessments can help with determining
assistance needed.
831
Measuring a client’s ability to perform the ADLs and IADLs is important
not just in determining the level of assistance required, but as a metric
for a variety of services and programs related to caring for older adults
and for those with disabilities.
Many state-funded, non-Medicaid programs use an inability to perform
two or three ADLs as one of the eligibility criteria for participation in their
assistance programs.
Medicaid often requires older adults to be qualified for nursing home
care, and nursing home care qualification can be determined by how
much assistance one requires with ADLs. Long-term care insurance
often uses an inability to perform the ADLs as a trigger for paying out on
a policy. Social Security Disability Insurance (SSDI) also considers
ADLs as a qualification factor.
ADLs are activities in which clients engage on a day-to-day basis.
These are everyday personal care activities that are fundamental to
caring for oneself and maintaining independence.
There are many variations on the definition of the ADLs, but most
organizations agree there are five basic categories.
■ Personal hygiene—bathing, grooming, and oral care
■ Dressing—the ability to make appropriate clothing decisions and physic
dress oneself
■ Eating—the ability to feed oneself though not necessarily to prepare foo
■ Maintaining continence—both the mental and physical ability to us
restroom
■ Transferring—moving oneself from seated to standing and getting in
out of bed
IADLs are activities related to independent living. The instrumental
activities are more subtle than ADLs. They can help determine with
greater detail the level of assistance required. The IADLs include:
■ Basic communication skills—such as using a regular phone, mobile ph
email, or the Internet
■ Transportation—either by driving oneself, arranging rides, or the abilit
use public transportation
■ Meal preparation—meal planning, preparation, storage, and the abilit
832
safely use kitchen equipment
■ Shopping—the ability to make appropriate food and clothing purch
decisions
■ Housework—doing laundry, cleaning dishes, and maintaining a hygi
place of residence
■ Managing medications—taking accurate dosages at the appropriate tim
managing refills, and avoiding conflicts
■ Managing personal finances—operating within a budget, writing che
paying bills, and avoiding scams
The question contains a qualifying word—MOST. While it may be useful
to assess all areas listed, level of care is primarily determined by the
amount of help that the client needs to complete necessary personal
assistance and independent living tasks.
Adapting to life changes may be important to the client’s ability to adjust
to a new home but will not directly relate to “making a determination of
the needed level of care.” Managing medical problems may also need
to be addressed. However, such assistance can be done by care
management in any setting.
Question Assesses
Assessment, Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning
15. C. Clients engaged in enmeshed interpersonal relationships are nearly
always the last to know. Often social workers work with adult children
who are recovering from the pain and confusion caused by enmeshed
relationships with parents.
There are many signs of enmeshed relationships including:
■ Neglecting other relationships because of an obsession or concern a
one relationship
■ Happiness contingent upon a relationship
■ Self-esteem contingent upon a relationship
■ Excessive anxiety, fear, or a compulsion to fix the problem whenever th
is a disagreement in a relationship
■ Feeling of loneliness that overwhelms when not with the other perso
833
often creating irrational desires to reconnect
■ Symbiotic emotional connections which result in an individual becom
angry, upset, or depressed when another person is angry, upset
depressed
■ Strong desire to fix another person’s situation and change the pers
state of mind
When relationships are enmeshed, they are no longer able to grow.
Social workers should work to establish healthy boundaries and respect
for autonomous choices. This process can be painful for clients.
The feelings and behaviors of the couple are indicative of enmeshment.
Once the cause of the problem is identified, the question can be
simplified to picking out the treatment focus when working with
enmeshed relationships. The wife is not the client as the couple sought
treatment, so focusing on the wife’s self-worth will not address the
problem. Understanding each other’s feelings will not help each person
develop boundaries and differentiate from one another, which is the root
of the issue.
Question Assesses
Human Development, Diversity, and Behavior in the Environment
16. C. Case notes may be subject to a range of legislative processes and
requirements during and following the conclusion of professional
relationships. The nature of these requirements may differ greatly
according to the jurisdiction or nature/context of practice. Social workers
should use care to make sure that case notes are impartial, accurate,
and complete. Information may need to be added to client records to
ensure that they are not misleading and are comprehensive. Care
should be always taken to avoid errors or omissions. If a change must
be made to correct an error or omission, the change should be recorded
as a new and separate case note. In addition to outlining the error or
omission as part of new case notes, it is advisable to provide
explanations for earlier absences or inaccuracies.
An existing case note should never be amended or changed in light of
additional information obtained at a later date. This should always
constitute a new case note.
834
Careful and diligent documentation enhances the quality of services
provided to clients. Social workers should take reasonable steps to
ensure that documentation in records is accurate and reflects the
services provided. In addition, social workers should include sufficient
and timely documentation in records to facilitate the delivery of services
and to ensure continuity of services provided to clients in the future.
Comprehensive records are necessary to assess clients’
circumstances, as well as plan and deliver services.
Social workers should know the professional protocol for adding or
making changes to client records, so asking for supervisory input is not
needed. Material should never be added to existing case notes as they
need to accurately reflect documentation of “the facts” that were known
at the times of these entries.
Question Assesses
Psychotherapy, Clinical Interventions, and Case Management
17. C. Interviewing skills are essential to ensuring that clients feel
understood, problems are assessed, and effective treatment is
delivered. A comprehensive social work interview includes conducting a
multiple biopsychosocial–spiritual–cultural assessment in order to better
understand the presenting problem. Questions asked and techniques
used may promote or inhibit information gathering and other aspects of
the problem-solving process. Skills and questioning techniques used
include active listening, empathy, rapport building, open- and closed-
ended inquiries, silence, and so on.
When interviewing clients, social workers should avoid “Why” questions
in order to prevent clients from feeling as though they need to defend
their choices and actions. Although it may be necessary to learn the
reasoning behind clients’ choices and actions, the wording used may
impact responses. For example, if a social worker needs to know why a
client is missing doses of medication, instead of asking “Why haven’t
you been able to take your medication as prescribed?” it is better to ask,
“What are some of the reasons for skipping your medication?” The
difference may be subtle, but it can affect the way a client perceives the
question. With the “Why” method, a client may be defensive, whereas
the “What” method allows a client to reflect on action without feeling
judged.
835
The correct answer is the BEST question for the social worker to ask as
part of the assessment. The use of the qualifying word, which is
capitalized, indicates that other response choices may be appropriate,
but are not as essential to identifying causes for the presenting problem,
the primary aim of assessment. The social worker should find out the
reasons for the medication noncompliance. There is no indication that
the client is not taking the medication to become hospitalized.
The correct “What” question is preferred to the inaccurate “Why”
question to avoid having the client feel judged. The “Why” response
choice also implies that the client’s actions are in direct violation of the
doctor’s orders as she has not been able to take her medication “as
prescribed.” Pointing out that she has done something other than what
the doctor stated can cause defensiveness or shame.
Question Assesses
Psychotherapy, Clinical Interventions, and Case Management
18. C. Family therapy is based on the idea that a family is a system of
different parts. A change in any part of the system will trigger changes in
all the other parts, so when one member of a family is affected by a
substance use disorder, everyone is affected. As a result, family
dynamics can change in unhealthy ways. Some family members may
take on too much responsibility, other family members may act out, and
some may just shut down. Often a family remains stuck in unhealthy
patterns even after the family member with the behavioral health
disorder moves into recovery. Even in the best circumstances, families
can find it hard to adjust to the person in their midst who is recovering,
who is behaving differently than before, and who needs support. Family
therapy can help the family as a whole recover and heal.
Family therapy is typically introduced after the individual in treatment for
addiction has made progress in recovery. This could be a few months
after treatment starts, or a year or more later. Timing is important
because people new to recovery have a lot to do. They are working to
remain stable in their new patterns of behavior and ways of thinking.
They are just beginning to face the many changes they must make to
stay mentally healthy, as well as remain clean or sober. They are
learning such things as how to deal with urges to fall into old patterns,
how to resist triggers and cravings, and how to avoid temptations to
rationalize and make excuses. For them to explore family issues at the
same time can be too much. It can potentially contribute to relapse.
836
Family therapy tends to be most helpful once the person in treatment is
fully committed to the recovery process and is ready to make more
changes.
Social workers should understand family roles in addiction and
codependency. Addiction is a “family affair”; therapy with the entire
family involves understanding the roles that members assume which
are dysfunctional and support the addictive behavior. However, it is
important that clients have made progress in their recovery before
taking on additional stress, which comes with understanding family roles
in families impacted by addiction. Clients’ acknowledgement of their
addictions and family dysfunction, as well as detoxification—if needed—
would come prior to the onset of family therapy. Clients may not yet be
stable in their new patterns of behavior.
This question contains a qualifying word—BEST. There may be reasons
for engaging in family therapy earlier or later in the recovery process,
but it is most beneficial after individual progress has been made by
clients.
Question Assesses
Human Development, Diversity, and Behavior in the Environment
19. A. Ethical and legal issues regarding mandatory reporting are very clear
when victims are minors. There is both a legal and ethical obligation to
report all child abuse to protective services. However, when the victim is
a client who is now an adult, the required action becomes less clear.
Laws vary by jurisdiction, and it is important for social workers to be
aware of their legal duties.
Social workers face ethical dilemmas in these situations as they may
want perpetrators to be accountable for their actions. However, if clients
disclose such abuse in strict confidence and do not want the abuse
reported, there is a need to respect their privacy. This abuse does not
meet any of the exceptions for disclosure such as due to consent by
clients, clear and immediate danger, and other requirements by law
(such as duty to warn).
In these instances, social workers should provide clients with
information and other support so they can consider their options more
fully. For instance, they may not be familiar with what happens during
abuse investigations, fearing that reports may lead to immediate
837
notoriety and broad publication. Legal and procedural protections
afforded to survivors of sex-related crimes may also not be known.
However, even with such information and support, adult clients may
resist wanting their abuse reported. Thus, social workers should respect
their right to self-determination and should avoid imposing their own
beliefs on clients.
As professional ethical standards do not explicitly address the situation
in the scenario, it is necessary to consider the ethical principles of
beneficence (doing good), nonmaleficence (avoiding doing harm),
justice, and respect. While reporting the abuse may help protect other
minors from being abused, it may be experienced as harm by the client
as she is not emotionally ready to confront her father about the abuse.
Reporting the abuse also may have a negative impact on the social
worker/client relationship as the client may feel betrayed by the
disclosure. From a justice perspective, reporting the abuse may be a
method of bringing the alleged perpetrator to justice, but justice could
entail prioritizing the client’s emotional well-being. Finally, respect
involves honoring the client’s rights to privacy and self-determination.
The scenario stated that there was no legal duty for social workers, in
this jurisdiction, to report past abuse as the survivor is no longer a
minor. If it were required, the correct response may have been different.
The scenario also indicates that the father is not a danger to other
children given his physical and/or mental status.
While supervision is always useful, the social worker should not be
“passing the buck” and relying on the supervisor to make the decision.
The social worker should be knowledgeable about the laws and issues
regarding mandatory reporting.
Question Assesses
Professional Values and Ethics
20. C. In using feedback during the beginning phase of the problem-solving
process, a social worker encourages clients to comment about service
purpose, social worker–client roles, ethical factors, or any other aspect
of the introductory sessions. An important part of communicating
effectively involves checking whether clients have understood the
messages being conveyed. Seeking feedback serves this function.
Seeking feedback early in the problem-solving process is part of the
838
informed consent process. Clients are forced to identify areas that are
unclear, share thoughts that have occurred to them, or express
disagreements. The use of feedback sends the message that treatment
is a mutual and reciprocal process and that social workers are interested
in what clients have to say. It sets the expectation that clients will
continue to be active participants throughout the helping process.
The question contains a qualifying word—MOST. The question
specifically asks about “the beginning phase of treatment.” During the
beginning phase, social workers introduce and identify themselves and
seek introductions from clients. Following the exchange of introductions,
social workers describe the initial purposes for meetings, identify
professional roles that social workers might undertake, orient clients to
the process, and identify relevant policy and ethical factors that might
apply. Two of the response choices do not directly relate to this initial
orientation and educating clients about the reciprocal nature of the
work, as well as engaging them by showing interest. Ensuring an
understanding of the client’s problem is done during assessment and
focusing the treatment on a client’s feelings and thoughts is part of
intervention. Both actions involve feedback but not during “the
beginning phase of treatment.”
Question Assesses
Psychotherapy, Clinical Interventions, and Case Management
21. A. Social stratification refers to a system by which a society ranks
categories of people in a hierarchy. By examining policies, procedures,
regulations, and laws—as well as practices—it is perfectly clear that
some groups have greater status, power, and wealth than other groups.
Social stratification is based on four major principles:
1. Social stratification is a trait of society, not simply a reflection of
differences.
2. Social stratification persists over generations.
3. Social stratification is universal but takes different forms across
societies.
4. Social stratification involves both inequality and beliefs, as inequality
in a society’s philosophy.
839
This question requires social workers to understand the effects that
policies, procedures, regulations, and laws have on practice, including
perpetuating social stratification.
Racial inequality results from institutional discrimination in which
policies and procedures do not treat all racial groups equally. While
people of color often do not have the same opportunities, the question
is broader, seeking the term which relates to differences in social status.
These differences can also result from other attributes, such as gender.
Institutional malfeasance refers to wrongdoing by an organization or
corporation.
Question Assesses
Human Development, Diversity, and Behavior in the Environment
22. C. Supervision is an essential and integral part of training and
continuing education required for the skillful development of professional
social workers. The knowledge base of the social work profession has
expanded and the population it serves has become more complex.
Supervision protects clients, supports practitioners, and ensures that
professional standards and quality services are delivered by competent
social workers. It is important to the profession to have assurance that
all social workers are equipped with the necessary skills to deliver
competent and ethical social work services. Equally important to the
profession is the responsibility to protect clients.
Documentation is an important legal tool that verifies that services,
including supervision, occurred. Supervisors should assist supervisees
in learning how to properly document client services performed,
regularly review their documentation, and hold them to high standards.
When appropriate, supervisors should train the supervisees to
document for reimbursement and claim submissions.
Each supervisory session should be documented separately by
supervisors and supervisees. Documentation for supervised sessions
should be available to both parties and provided to supervisees within a
reasonable time after each session. Social work regulatory boards may
request some form of supervision documentation when supervisees
apply for licensure. Records should be safeguarded and kept
confidential.
840
The question contains a qualifying word—MOST. Supervisors are
responsible for the actions of supervisees, but records should not only
be kept by them. Failure to keep any documentation of supervision
sessions is ill-advised as information used to make critical treatment
decisions will not be recorded. These records should be transparent
and consistent with both supervisor and supervisee having agreed upon
knowledge about and documentation of the sessions.
Question Assesses
Psychotherapy, Clinical Interventions, and Case Management
23. A. Social workers employed in agency settings may find that they are
required to have multiple supervisors. In circumstances in which a social
worker is being supervised simultaneously by more than one person, it is
best practice to have a contractual agreement or memorandum of
understanding delineating the role of each supervisor, including
parameters of the relationships, information sharing, priorities, and how
conflicts will be resolved.
Only the correct answer results in an agreement delineating the role of
each supervisor. Meeting with all supervisors simultaneously is not
realistic or needed if all parties agree about their respective roles and
responsibilities. When a social worker answers to more than one
supervisor, the likelihood of conflict is enhanced; therefore, guidelines
which outline the agreed upon flow of information and how conflicts
should be resolved are essential.
Question Assesses
Psychotherapy, Clinical Interventions, and Case Management
24. B. Social workers who do forensic work wrestle with professional ethical
issues that emerge in determining client mental fitness to face
prosecution. The process of evaluating whether clients are competent to
stand trial involves two major areas. First, clients should understand the
legal proceedings against them, what they have been charged with,
what the roles of the different court personnel are, the difference
between pleading guilty and not guilty, and what accepting a plea
bargain means. The second factor is the clients’ ability to assist in their
own defense or their ability to work with their attorneys and take an
active part in their own defense.
841
If a client’s mental status is in question, the social worker tells the
defense attorney, who then brings the issue to the judge. Alternately,
the state’s attorney or the judge could raise the issue. The judge then
issues a court order mandating a formal evaluation of client competency
to stand trial.
A formal evaluation may be done by a psychiatrist working alone or a
team of mental health professionals, including a psychiatrist,
psychologist, and/or forensic social worker.
After the formal evaluation of competence to stand trial, the next phase
is often “restoration,” in which a client is sent to a particular setting,
most often a hospital, to be “restored to competence.” A client is usually
in the hospital for 60 to 90 days for the initial restoration, undergoing a
full evaluation by psychologists, psychiatrists, and social workers and
attending classes to learn about the court process to face charges as a
competent defendant.
Competency restoration is a psychoeducational intervention in which
clients who have been found incapable of proceeding in legal trials due
to any combination of limited understanding, communication deficits, or
impaired ability to conform their behaviors to the demands of the
courtroom are rendered capable. It is generally a part of a multifaceted
treatment strategy that may include anger management skills, relaxation
training, and cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) as adjunct
interventions to education regarding general legal processes and
specific aspects of the defendant’s case. At the conclusion, clients
should be able to discuss aspects of their cases with their attorneys,
differentially weigh the risks and possible benefits of the different
pleadings, strategize consideration of testimonials and evidence, testify,
and conduct themselves in a manner suitable to the courtroom. Clients
should understand the roles of the court officers, the responsibilities and
limitations of judges and juries, and that their attorneys have their best
interests in mind.
Competency restoration processes occur before sentencing or
restitution decisions. Social workers evaluate and deliver services
focused on developing or regaining clients’ abilities to participate in
legal proceedings.
Question Assesses
Professional Values and Ethics
842
25. C. The right of privileged communication—which assumes that a
professional cannot disclose confidential information without the client’s
consent—originated in British common law. The attorney–client privilege
was the first professional relationship to gain the right of privileged
communication. Over time, other groups of professionals have sought
this right.
Social workers should understand the distinction between confidentiality
and privileged communication. Confidentiality refers to the professional
norm that information offered by or pertaining to clients will not be
shared with third parties. Privilege refers to the disclosure of confidential
information in court or during other legal proceedings.
Courts commonly cite the following four conditions that must be met for
information to be considered privileged:
■ The harm caused by disclosure of the confidential information w
outweigh the benefits of disclosure during legal proceedings.
■ The parties involved in the conversation assumed that it was confidenti
■ Confidentiality is an important element in the relationship.
■ The broader community recognizes the importance of this relationship.
A significant court decision for social workers concerning privileged
communications was the landmark case of Jaffe v. Redmond (1996) in
which the U.S. Supreme Court ruled that the clients of clinical social
workers have the right to privileged communication in federal courts.
Many states, though not all, now extend the right of privileged
communication to clinical social workers’ clients.
Just because service information is kept in a secured location does not
mean that this information is considered privileged by the courts.
Additionally, when the harm caused by keeping information confidential
outweighs the benefits, the courts are less, not more, likely to uphold
privilege.
Question Assesses
Professional Values and Ethics
26. A. There are four major parenting styles which reflect the skills and
capabilities of clients.
843
Permissive parenting, sometimes referred to as indulgent parenting, has
very few demands placed on children. Permissive parents rarely
discipline their children because they have relatively low expectations of
maturity and self-control. They are often nontraditional and lenient, not
requiring mature behavior, allowing considerable self-regulation, and
avoiding confrontation. Permissive parents are generally nurturing and
communicative with their children, often taking on the status of a friend
more than that of a parent.
Authoritative parenting establishes rules and guidelines that children are
expected to follow. However, this parenting style is democratic.
Authoritative parents are responsive to their children and willing to listen
to questions. When children fail to meet the expectations, these parents
are nurturing and forgiving rather than punishing. These parents monitor
and impart clear standards for their children’s conduct. They are
assertive, but not intrusive and restrictive. Their disciplinary methods
are supportive, rather than punitive. They want their children to be
assertive as well as socially responsible and self-regulated as well as
cooperative.
In authoritarian parenting, children are expected to follow the strict rules
established by the parents. Failure to follow such rules usually results in
punishment. Authoritarian parents do not explain the reasoning behind
these rules. If asked to explain, the parent might simply reply, “Because
I said so.” These parents have high demands but are not responsive to
their children. These parents are obedience- and status-oriented and
expect their orders to be obeyed without explanation.
An uninvolved parenting style is characterized by few demands, low
responsiveness, and little communication. While these parents fulfill the
child’s basic needs, they are generally detached from their child’s life. In
extreme cases, these parents may even reject or neglect the needs of
their children.
This is a recall question on parenting styles. Social workers should be
knowledgeable about the impact that parenting styles have on child
development outcomes. Authoritarian parenting styles generally lead to
children who are obedient and proficient, but they rank lower in
happiness, social competence, and self-esteem. Authoritative parenting
styles tend to result in children who are happy, capable, and successful.
Permissive parenting often results in children who rank low in happiness
and self-regulation. These children are more likely to experience
problems with authority and tend to perform poorly in school.
844
Uninvolved parenting styles rank lowest across all life domains. These
children tend to lack self-control, have low self-esteem, and are less
competent than their peers.
Question Assesses
Human Development, Diversity, and Behavior in the Environment
27. B. Dysfunctional family dynamics are traits or behaviors that
characterize unhealthy interactions between members. In dysfunctional
families, members tend to communicate poorly and not listen to each
other. Triangulation is a family therapy concept discussed most famously
by multigenerational family systems theorist Murray Bowen. Bowen
described dyads as being inherently unstable under stress, much like a
two-legged stool. When in balance, the dyad is capable of functioning
well and meeting the needs of both people in it. However, when thrown
out of balance by conflict, stress, or transitions, the dyad will often pull in
a third person, or “leg” of the stool, to help them stabilize the
relationship.
According to Bowen, some triangulation is normal and even healthy in
the course of family interactions. Because dyads are inherently
unstable, the involvement of a third party can assist a two-person
relationship in overcoming impasses, meeting needs, and coping
through stressful times. This kind of triangulation occurs because both
people in a dyad are looking for healthy and effective mediation. When
the triangulated person gives input, it is accepted into the dyad and
processed together in a way that moves the original dyad forward in
their relationship. Healthy triangulation can also occur in the context of
parents (or other family caregivers) who come together to meet the
needs of a third member, such as a child.
Triangulation can become unhealthy in families when it causes undue
stress on the third party and/or when it prevents, rather than invites,
resolution of the dyad’s conflict. In the scenario, the triangulation is
being sought by only one of the spouses. Furthermore, the input
provided is not being brought back into the marriage for joint processing
by both spouses. It is being withheld by the husband for his own
individual purposes. The husband’s conversations with his mother are
essentially taking the place of the emotional process that needs to be
occurring within the marriage itself in order to return the marriage to
healthy functioning.
845
Role reversal is a situation in which two people have chosen or been
forced to exchange their duties and responsibilities, so that each is now
doing what the other used to do. This scenario is not a role reversal as
the mother has taken on being an emotional confidant, a function
usually assumed by a spouse. However, the wife has not taken on the
mother’s duties or responsibilities.
Entropy, based in systems theory, is characteristic of randomness and
disintegration within a structure.
This is a recall question related to family systems. Even when the
names of theories are not mentioned, social workers are often asked
about their key terms and concepts. When proper names are listed as
response choices, it is useful to look at them first, before reading the
question. Often a response choice will look correct after reading the
question simply due to the words used. However, the one that looks the
best is often not correct.
Question Assesses
Psychotherapy, Clinical Interventions, and Case Management
28. B. Delusions are false beliefs which clients hold with a strong amount of
conviction. These beliefs are not typical of their culture or religion, and
clients adhere to the erroneous beliefs despite evidence and proof which
totally contradict them. Delusions of reference are perceptions that
stimuli in the environment are directed toward clients themselves and
referencing them specifically even though they are not. It is the belief
that simple coincidences are relevant and specific to clients even though
they are not connected to them in any way; for example, clients thinking
people they do not know are talking about them or thinking that
newscasters are speaking directly to them.
Clients with delusions of reference may think that things written in
newspapers or stated in newscasts, passages found in a book, or the
words in a song are about them directly. Thus, neutral events are
believed to have special and personal meaning; for example, clients
might believe billboards or celebrities are sending messages meant
specifically for them.
These ideas and connections are delusions as they are thought to be
true, though they are not. This can be a sign of mental illness such as
schizophrenia spectrum and other psychotic disorders.
846
The question requires knowledge about basic terminology associated
with psychopathology or the study of mental illness or the manifestation
of behaviors that may be indicative of mental illness or psychological
impairment. There are also common delusions such as delusions of
grandeur, control, guilt, persecution, jealousy, or paranoia. Social
workers should be aware of the presence of delusional thoughts by
clients and the diagnostic methods/tools that can be used to identify
them.
The qualifying word—BEST—indicates that more than one listed
response choice may apply, but the most suitable definition is the one
that illustrates the key attributes of this delusional type. Thus, the
correct response choice is the one which indicates that neutral events
are believed to have special and personal meaning.
Question Assesses
Assessment, Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning
29. B. Client-centered therapy, also known as person-centered therapy, is a
nondirective form of talk therapy that was developed by humanist
psychologist Carl Rogers during the 1940s and 1950s. Client-centered
therapy operates according to three basic principles that reflect the
attitude of the therapist to the client:
1. The social worker is congruent with the client.
2. The social worker provides the client with unconditional positive rega
3. The social worker shows empathetic understanding to the client.
Congruence is also called genuineness. Congruence is the most
important attribute in counseling, according to Rogers. This means that,
unlike psychodynamic practitioners who generally maintains a “blank
screen” and reveals little of their own personality in therapy, the
Rogerian is keen to allow clients to experience the social workers as
they really are. Social workers do not have a façade (like
psychoanalysis); that is, social workers’ internal and external
experiences are one in the same. In short, social workers are authentic.
The next Rogerian core condition is unconditional positive regard.
Rogers believed that it is important that clients are valued as
themselves so they can grow and fulfill their potential. A social worker
847
should have a deep and genuine caring for a client. A social worker may
not approve of some of a client’s actions, but a social worker does
approve of a client. In short, a social worker needs an attitude of “I’ll
accept you as you are.” The person-centered social worker is thus
careful to always maintain a positive attitude to a client, even when
disgusted by a client’s actions.
Empathy is the ability to understand what a client is feeling by having
the ability to understand sensitively and accurately a client’s experience
and feelings in the here-and-now.
While cultural competence is essential for working with diverse client
groups, it is not specifically related to client-centered therapy, which is
the focus of the question. The same is true for client self-determination
and expertise. All clients are experts about their own lives so there
would not be a distinction of client expertise in this treatment type.
Question Assesses
Psychotherapy, Clinical Interventions, and Case Management
30. B. Social workers should be knowledgeable about legal documents
related to confidentiality of client information. Confidentiality of mandated
clients is particularly tricky as documents may be subject to release
without client consent.
Social workers have a duty to claim privilege on behalf of their clients
when asked to release any information without client permission.
Privilege is a right owned by clients to prevent their confidential
information from being used in legal proceedings. The NASW Code of
Ethics requires social workers to wait until ordered by the court before
disclosing information in legal proceedings, absent client consent or an
imminent threat of harm. A subpoena is a mandate to provide evidence
or testimony—but is not a final ruling or order by a court on the legal
requirement to provide information or admissibility of the evidence. A
subpoena is not a court order. Most subpoenas are issued by attorneys.
The NASW Code of Ethics provides that when a court-ordered
disclosure could cause harm to the client, the social worker should
request that the court withdraw or limit the order or keep the records
under seal. It is not clear how a social worker can meaningfully
implement this provision. The social worker could refuse to obey a
court’s order as a matter of conscience, but this should be done only if
848
the social worker is prepared to be found in contempt of court and face
time in jail, a fine, or both. The need to be aware of court or legal
mandates is the cost of doing business in a profession where clients
can be involved in legal disputes or matters.
Clients who are mandated to receive services may also be referred to
as involuntary or court-ordered clients. All of these terms indicate that
clients did not voluntarily choose or consent to receipt of services.
There is legal authorization to mandate the receipt of treatment. Thus,
there may also be a similar mandate to get access to documentation
related to the receipt of services. The extent of what will need to be
disclosed can vary and social workers are advised to be aware of these
limits before the onset of treatment and review them with clients in their
initial meetings.
The social worker has a responsibility to understand the extent to which
documentation is privileged, so there is no need to have the client see a
lawyer. Promising the client that consent will be obtained before
releasing information can be misleading as the client is mandated which
means that there is a court order.
The court order and any relevant legal documents should be obtained
by the social worker and consulted whenever there are questions
related to the service provision and/or reporting. These documents
should be reviewed with clients. Social workers have legal mandates to
comply with court orders once they are appointed to be providers of
services and agree to the terms. If there is concern about mandates in
court orders, social workers should try to get them changed or be
removed as treating professionals by the appointing courts.
Question Assesses
Professional Values and Ethics
31. C. When addiction and substance abuse occur during pregnancy, it can
have effects not only on the pregnant mother, but also on the unborn
child. Opioid use in pregnancy is associated with an increased risk of
adverse outcomes. The current standard of care for pregnant women
with opioid dependence is referral for opioid-assisted therapy with
methadone. Medically supervised tapered doses of opioids during
pregnancy often result in relapse to former use. Abrupt discontinuation
of opioids in an opioid-dependent pregnant woman can result in preterm
labor, fetal distress, or fetal demise. After birth, special considerations
849
are needed for women who are opioid-dependent to ensure appropriate
pain management, to prevent postpartum relapse and a risk of
overdose, and to ensure adequate contraception to prevent unintended
pregnancies. Stabilization with opioid-assisted therapy is compatible with
breastfeeding. Neonatal abstinence syndrome is an expected and
treatable condition that follows prenatal exposure to opioid agonists.
The rationale for opioid-assisted therapy during pregnancy is to prevent
complications of illicit opioid use and narcotic withdrawal, encourage
prenatal care and drug treatment, reduce criminal activity, and avoid
risks to a client of associating with a drug culture. Methadone
maintenance, as prescribed and dispensed on a daily basis by a
registered substance abuse treatment program, is part of a
comprehensive package of prenatal care, chemical dependency
counseling, family therapy, nutritional education, and other medical and
psychosocial services as indicated for pregnant women with opioid
dependence.
This is a recall question which assesses social workers’ awareness of
the effects of addiction and appropriate treatment protocols. Medically
supervised withdrawal from opioids in opioid-dependent women is not
recommended during pregnancy because the withdrawal is associated
with high relapse rates. During pregnancy, chronic untreated heroin use
is associated with an increased risk of fetal growth restriction, fetal
death, preterm labor, and other adverse outcomes. Additionally, lifestyle
issues associated with illicit drug use put the pregnant woman at risk of
engaging in activities, such as prostitution, theft, and violence, to
support herself or her addiction.
Methadone is an opioid used to treat pain and as maintenance therapy
or to help with tapering in clients with opioid dependence. Thus,
discontinuation of all opioids is an incorrect response choice. Best
practice is medication-assisted treatment for all clients, including
pregnant women.
Question Assesses
Human Development, Diversity, and Behavior in the Environment
32. B. Older adulthood is a time of continued growth. Clients in the later
stages of life contribute significantly to their families, communities, and
society. At the same time, clients face multiple biopsychosocial–
spiritual–cultural challenges as they age: changes in health and physical
850
abilities; difficulty in accessing comprehensive, affordable, and high-
quality health and behavioral health care; decreased economic security;
increased vulnerability to abuse and exploitation; and loss of meaningful
social roles and opportunities to remain engaged in society. Social
workers should understand the needs of older adults and issues that
may be facing them.
Sundowning is a term used to refer to behavioral changes that often
occur in the late afternoon or evening in people with Alzheimer’s
disease and similar conditions. The behavioral changes may take the
form of aggression, agitation, delusions, hallucinations, paranoia,
increased disorientation, or wandering and pacing about. Sundowning is
not a disease, but a group of symptoms that occur at a specific time of
the day that may affect people with dementia. The exact cause of this
behavior is unknown. Factors that may aggravate late-day confusion
include fatigue, low lighting, increased shadows, disruption of the body’s
“internal clock,” and/or difficulty separating reality from dreams.
Reducing sundowning can be assisted by maintaining a predictable
routine for bedtime, waking, meals and activities, and limiting daytime
napping.
When sundowning occurs in a nursing home, it may be related to the
flurry of activity during staff shift changes or the lack of structured
activities in the late afternoon and evening. Staff arriving and leaving
may cue clients with Alzheimer’s to want to go home or to check on
their children—or other behaviors that were appropriate in the late
afternoon in their past. It may help to occupy their time with another
activity during that period.
Folie à deux, or shared psychosis, is when symptoms of a delusional
belief and hallucinations are transmitted from one individual to another.
Neurodegeneration is an umbrella term for the progressive loss of
structure or function of neurons. Many neurodegenerative diseases
including amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, Parkinson’s, Alzheimer’s, and
Huntington’s occur as a result of neurodegenerative processes. Such
diseases are incurable.
This is a recall question which relies on social workers being able to
recognize and understand terms associated with neuro generative
diseases, such as Alzheimer’s. Such diseases cause changes in client
behavior. One of the response choices, folie à deux, is used to describe
shared psychosis, which is not associated with neuro generative
851
disease. While the client’s behavior may be caused by
neurodegeneration, the BEST description of the change throughout the
day is sundowning.
Question Assesses
Assessment, Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning
33. C. There is tremendous importance placed on social relationships,
which consist of interactions between clients and their family and friends.
Thus, social workers often rely on the use of collaterals to obtain
relevant information to assist clients. Often ethical standards are silent
on what obligations, if any, social workers owe to clients’ family
members, friends, and other collaterals who may be brought into the
helping process. Thus, social workers should adhere to broad
professional values when interacting with collaterals. In the absence of
ethical standards, it is helpful for social workers to have agency policies
and contracts that fill these gaps. For instance, before meeting with
collaterals, there should be an agreement regarding the meeting’s
purpose, what information will be shared, and how that information may
be used. Although contracts have traditionally been used with clients,
they can also be used with collaterals to clarify expectations, to preempt
conflicts, and to provide clients, collaterals, and social workers with legal
safeguards. Service contracts with collaterals could include, but not be
limited to, explaining the roles of social workers, their primary
commitments to clients, any commitments to collaterals, the roles of
collaterals, the nature of collateral involvement, benefits and risks to
collaterals, and/or confidentiality issues.
The scenario relates to the client’s request to have his daughter come
to the next session. Using other family members or friends as collaterals
may be helpful but does not address the suggestion at hand.
Confidentiality is a client right, so a social worker can share information
with others when requested by the client. Discussing client information
with collaterals is appropriate if the social worker ensures that the
sharing is done at the client’s wishes and there is a clear understanding
about what will be discussed. The correct answer ensures that there is
a mutual understanding about key ethical issues which may arise when
using the daughter as a collateral informant.
Question Assesses
Assessment, Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning
852
34. A. With the increasing focus on interdisciplinary practice in recent years,
social workers may be supervised by a professional of a different
discipline. Although this may be appropriate within the team or unit
context, social workers should seek supervision or consultation from
another social worker with regard to specific social work practices and
issues. Similarly, a social worker providing supervision to a member of
another discipline should refer that supervisee to a member of the
supervisee’s own profession for practice-specific supervision or
consultation.
Professional resources may be helpful but should have already been
consulted. The social work profession has a unique set of values and
practice standards, so it is essential that the social worker seek
supervision or consultation from another social worker. The hospital
supervisor should be aware that such supervision is being sought and
involved clients should be informed of the need for “outside” supervision
or consultation if applicable. Determining how the supervisor’s discipline
would resolve the issue does not help with social work practice
concerns.
Question Assesses
Psychotherapy, Clinical Interventions, and Case Management
35. B. Performance monitoring is used to provide information on (a) key
aspects of how programs are operating; (b) whether, and to what extent,
program objectives are being attained (e.g., numbers of clients served
compared to target goals, reductions in target behaviors); and (c)
identification of failures to produce program outputs, for use in managing
or redesigning program operations. Performance indicators can also be
developed to monitor service quality by collecting data on the
satisfaction of those served and report on program efficiency,
effectiveness, and productivity by assessing the relationship between
the resources used (program inputs) and the outcome indicators.
If conducted frequently enough and in a timely way, performance
monitoring can provide social workers with regular feedback that will
allow them to identify problems, take timely action, and subsequently
assess whether their actions have led to the improvements sought.
Performance monitoring involves identification and collection of specific
data on program outputs, outcomes, and accomplishments. Although
853
they may measure subjective factors such as client satisfaction, data is
often numeric, consisting of frequency counts, statistical averages,
ratios, or percentages.
Justification of the need for a service is not the aim of performance
monitoring. Performance monitoring occurs during implementation of
services while identification of needs happens before they are designed
or planned. Needs assessments are conducted to determine the scope
and severity of problems. Performance monitoring should not be
approached as a perfunctory task to justify ongoing operations or
delivery, or it will not lead to quality evaluations of what is working and
what is not. Additionally, identifying key aspects of program operations
is not linked to performance. Performance monitoring needs to involve
an assessment of how agencies are doing regarding operations or
outcomes.
Question Assesses
Psychotherapy, Clinical Interventions, and Case Management
36. B. Clients who suffer from severe depression may be at risk of suicide.
Although suicide cannot be predicted or prevented with certainty,
knowing the warning signs can help recognize when clients are at risk.
The most effective way to try to prevent suicide is to recognize the
warning signs, respond immediately, and treat underlying causes of
suicide such as depression.
Some warning signs of suicide include the following behaviors:
■ Talking about suicide or death
■ Feeling hopeless, helpless, or worthless and saying things like, “It w
be better if I wasn’t here” or “I want out”
■ Exhibiting deep sadness, loss of interest in pleasurable activities, tro
sleeping and eating
■ Having abrupt change of mood, from extreme sadness to happines
calm
■ Engaging in risk-taking behavior such as driving too fast and recklessly
■ Calling or visiting people to say goodbye
■ Putting affairs in order such as making changes to a will
854
Along with these behaviors, clients who are depressed have a higher
risk of attempting suicide if they have ever previously made attempts,
have chronic or terminal illnesses, are separated or divorced, are
underemployed or unemployed, or have family histories of suicide.
The question contains a qualifying word—FIRST. There may be more
than one appropriate response choice, but the order in which they are to
occur is critical. Improvement in depressive symptoms can be an
indication of upcoming suicide attempts. Clients who have put plans in
place to end their lives often appear to be calmer or happier. The
knowledge that they will be ending their lives soon appears to bring with
it peace or happiness for clients plagued by depression.
Asking about changes which have recently taken place in the client’s life
is too vague and does not contain the questions needed to do a proper
suicide risk assessment. Praise will not assist the social worker in
understanding the client’s current mental status. The need for a suicide
risk assessment is most immediate when warning signs are present,
such as those described in the scenario.
Question Assesses
Assessment, Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning
37. B. There are many methods that social workers use to facilitate
communication. For example, within the teaching of dialectical behavior
therapy (DBT), conscious validation is often called upon to help clients
improve interpersonal effectiveness and mindfulness skills. DBT has six
levels of validation, with each “level” offering a different tactic for
validating a client.
Six Levels of Validation
1. Mindful engagement—listening as a way of showing presence and i
communicating understanding by way of nodding, making eye con
asking appropriate questions. (“I hear you! What’d you do after she
that?”)
2. Accurate reflection—repeating to ensure that the message is being
accurately. (“I just heard you say that your boss really likes you, but
think you’re doing a good job.”)
3. Reading cues—using nonverbal and other cues to determine current
The social worker may need some guesswork and should seek c
855
from a client if misunderstood (“You look unhappy. Is something
you?”)
4. Historical perspective—drawing on knowledge of a client’s prior exp
to lend perspective to current feelings (“Maybe you don’t trust y
girlfriend because your previous girlfriend cheated on you?”)
5. Assuring reasonableness—letting a client know that thoughts, fee
behaviors are normal and quite reasonable. This provides reas
comfort, and healthy perspective (“I see your frustration. Most peop
be annoyed.”)
6. Respectful honesty—providing feedback that lets a client know that t
worker respects the client enough to “keep it real.” This level of val
best delivered with an accompaniment of radical acceptance/genu
along with a nonjudgmental stance—considering that everyone has
and limitations (“I understand why you said that, but I think you co
had a better result if you used a softer tone.”)
The correct answer is the one that demonstrates “a higher level of
validation.” In the scenario, the social worker has already reflected the
client’s nervousness (Level 2). Suggesting that the client’s feelings may
result from his prior job loss—information that was deliberately provided
in the scenario—draws on knowledge of the client’s prior experience to
lend perspective to his current feelings (Level 4).
Listening to him is the first level of validation—prior to reflection. Helping
the client examine behavioral cues may be helpful but is not a validation
tool aimed at acknowledging and accepting his feelings.
While this question does not mention DBT, social workers are often
called upon to apply practice modalities and techniques to scenarios on
the examination. Social workers should never answer based on their
own opinions of what they think is best. Correct answers are grounded
in social work theories, models, and perspectives that were learned in
graduate coursework.
Question Assesses
Psychotherapy, Clinical Interventions, and Case Management
38. B. Preparing a case presentation can be a daunting task for a social
worker. While there is no standard format, there are key sections which
856
should be included. Sections include:
■ Demographics: Age, gender, ethnicity, living situation, social w
involvement, and so on
■ Background: Relevant history
■ Presenting Problem/Key Findings: Details of the presenting problem
current situation—signs and symptoms of illness, environmental fac
that impinge on the situation, and actual or potential resources
■ Formulation: Understanding of why things are as they are—including
or more theoretical perspectives and any uncertainty or ambivalence a
the situation
■ Interventions and Plans: What has been done and what plans exis
address the situation
■ Reason for Presentation: Explanation of why this situation is b
discussed—unique challenges? unusual problems?
■ More detailed case presentations may include additional sections inclu
legal/ethical, crisis/safety, diversity, and so on.
The supervisor is used in this question to determine if all the necessary
elements of a case presentation were included. The goal of supervision
is to ensure that clients receive the most effective and efficient services
possible. Thus, the supervisor will appear in many questions throughout
the examination to provide quality assurance, ensuring that a social
worker is meeting acceptable standards.
The case presentation described only contains some of the required
elements. Even a brief case presentation should contain information on
the presenting problem. The presenting problem was not mentioned,
making the case presentation incomplete.
Question Assesses
Psychotherapy, Clinical Interventions, and Case Management
39. A. Social workers should be well versed in techniques and instruments
used to assess client problems. Screening is the first step. Screening is
a universal process, meaning that an entire population group is
screened for an illness or disease. Screening is different from
assessment. Screening is brief, time limited, and intended to simply
identify clients at risk. In contrast, assessment is a deeper, more
857
thorough process that may take several sessions. Assessment
interviews are conducted by specialists. Social workers need to be
aware of screening models used in public health which identify people in
large populations who need further assessment. It would be unlikely that
clients would receive referrals to treatment directly after being screened
as further information about the scope and severity of the problem would
be needed. While education is usually provided during screening
processes, the desired outcome for those at-risk is further diagnostic
testing.
Question Assesses
Assessment, Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning
40. C. Attending is a term frequently used to describe the process of
nonverbally communicating to clients that social workers are open,
nonjudgmental, accepting of them as people, and interested in what they
say. The purpose of attending is to encourage clients to express
themselves as fully and freely as possible. During the beginning of the
problem-solving process, especially, nonverbal presentation is equally
important to verbal communication as clients are usually doing most of
the talking.
Many of the guidelines available may be useful, but they tend to reflect
nonverbal characteristics of majority-member, middle- and upper-class
adults. Good attending behavior is usually described as follows.
■ Eye Contact: Looking at clients is one way of showing interest. Howe
social workers can make clients feel uncomfortable if they stare at t
too intensely. The best way of showing that social workers are listenin
by looking at clients naturally.
■ Posture: This is a natural response of interest. It is best to lean slig
toward clients in a relaxed manner. Relaxation is important, since so
workers want to shift focus from themselves, so they are better abl
listen to clients.
■ Gesture: Social workers communicate a great deal with body moveme
If hands are flailed, arms are crossed, or chest/shoulders are hunc
then messages, whether intentional or unintentional, will
communicated.
■ Facial Expressions: Facial expressions, such as smiling, eyebrow rais
and frowning, indicate responsiveness.
858
Social workers should be aware of verbal and nonverbal communication
techniques. This question requires recall of the name of a nonverbal
technique. Determining the scope and severity of client problems is an
assessing task. Identifying alternatives which will result in change is a
planning or intervening action. Attending behavior is heavily used in
engaging, though it continues throughout the problem-solving process.
Question Assesses
Psychotherapy, Clinical Interventions, and Case Management
41. A. Effective interventions depend on using the most appropriate theory
and practice strategies for a given problem or situation. Different
theories/interventions are best suited for different problems. Evidence-
based practices (EBPs) are treatments that have been proven effective
(to some degree) through outcome evaluations. EBPs are interventions
that have strong scientific proof that they produce positive outcomes for
certain types of disorders. Clearly defining problems will help rationalize
the implementation of EBPs and help inform the selection process.
Other interventions—sometimes labeled promising practices—may also
produce good outcomes, but research has not been conducted at a
level to say that there is strong evidence for those practices. As such,
EBPs are treatments that are likely to be effective in changing target
behaviors if implemented with integrity.
The selection of an EBP depends on client problems, the outcomes
desired, and treatment preferences. For example, both antidepressant
medications and psychotherapy interventions are effective in the
treatment of depression in older adults. The choice of one of these
interventions over the other may vary with respect to the nature and
severity of depression, the presence of other health conditions or
medications, tolerability of side effects or required effort, and the
preferences and personal values of older adults regarding these
treatment characteristics.
The question contains a qualifying word—MOST—that indicates that all
response choices may be considered, but the correct answer is the
factor which should drive this decision. Treatment modalities differ
depending upon presenting problems. Social workers should not limit
available options to clients based on past history and/or setting. EBPs
which have demonstrated that they are effective for problems at hand
should be used. Social workers can advocate for additional resources or
859
refer clients to settings which provide the appropriate treatment if it is
not available in the current setting. In addition, treatment decisions
should not be based predominantly on what has been done in the past.
Interventions can be very effective to address some problems and
useless in helping others. Thus, matching EBPs/interventions to
presenting problems is vital to ensuring that change will occur.
Question Assesses
Assessment, Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning
42. C. Social workers should be familiar with standards regarding
confidentiality, including the process for disclosing information because
of mandatory reporting. Social workers should respect clients’ right to
privacy. Social workers should not solicit private information from clients
unless it is essential to providing services or conducting social work
evaluation or research. Once private information is shared, standards of
confidentiality apply. Social workers may disclose confidential
information when appropriate with valid consent from a client or a person
legally authorized to consent on behalf of a client. Social workers should
protect the confidentiality of all information obtained in the course of
professional service, except for compelling professional reasons. The
general expectation that social workers will keep information confidential
does not apply when disclosure is necessary to prevent serious,
foreseeable, and imminent harm to a client or others. In all instances,
social workers should disclose the least amount of confidential
information necessary to achieve the desired purpose; only information
that is directly relevant to the purpose for which the disclosure is made
should be revealed. Social workers should inform clients, to the extent
possible, about the disclosure of confidential information and the
potential consequences, when feasible before the disclosure is made.
This applies whether social workers disclose confidential information
based on a legal requirement or client consent.
The scenario calls for reporting the suspicions to the child protection
agency (referred to as the authorities in this question). The social
worker does not need to prove that the abuse is occurring or identify the
perpetrator so meeting with the child alone is not warranted. The child
protection agency is responsible for doing the investigation. There
should be no delays for documentation, though documentation will be
necessary at some point in the process.
Question Assesses
860
Professional Values and Ethics
43. C. A social worker’s own values and beliefs can greatly influence the
social worker–client relationship. Culture, race, and ethnicity are strongly
linked to values. Social workers should have self-awareness about their
own attitudes, values, and beliefs and a willingness to acknowledge that
they may be different than those served. Differences in values and
beliefs are very common when working with diverse populations. A
social worker is responsible for bringing up and addressing issues of
cultural difference with a client and is also ethically responsible for being
culturally competent by obtaining the appropriate knowledge, skills, and
experience.
Social workers should:
1. Move from being culturally unaware to aware of one’s own heritage
heritage of others
2. Value and celebrate differences of others rather than mainta
ethnocentric stance
3. Have an awareness of personal values and biases and how t
influence relationships with clients
4. Demonstrate comfort with racial and cultural differences between the
and clients
5. Have an awareness of personal and professional limitations
6. Acknowledge their own attitudes, beliefs, and feelings
The question acknowledges that “both school officials and the social
worker feel that the student is making a mistake.” Thus, it is critical for
the social worker to acknowledge the differences in values between the
professionals involved and the student as she is choosing family
responsibilities over pursuit of her education. This choice is based on
the personal principles and tenets that are important to her.
The incorrect response choices may be useful, but the correct one is
essential for the formation of a social worker–client relationship built on
the core values of the profession, including the student’s right to self-
determination. Despite the extent of the existing responsibilities and her
861
career goals, the student may value the needs of her family over
furthering her own education.
Question Assesses
Professional Values and Ethics
44. A. Many believe that gender dysphoria should be viewed and
approached from the perspective of a medical model rather than that of
a mental health model. Many anatomical inconsistencies can now be
corrected surgically or chemically to align with the experienced true self.
A medical diagnosis for individuals who are transgender, whose self-
experienced gender does not match the gender assigned at birth and
who require medical services to align the body with the experienced self,
is considered more appropriate and consistent with research and best
practices.
Those with the aforementioned diagnoses already are stigmatized by
society due to myths and misunderstandings and victimized by
intolerance and prejudice. The effects of this stigma are profound and
long-standing, resulting in increased risks for negative health, mental
health, educational, professional, and social outcomes. Continuing to
include these diagnoses as aberrant contributes to sustained
oppression of those who receive them.
Labeling individuals with gender dysphoria views these conditions as
“abnormal” and is harmful. Considering medical diagnoses instead is
more appropriate and addresses intolerance, discrimination, and
oppression related to considering these diagnoses as psychological
problems needing to be fixed. Gender-affirming care involves much
more than medication and surgery but both are best practice when
working with those with gender dysphoria.
Question Assesses
Human Development, Diversity, and Behavior in the Environment
45. A. Despite the high prevalence of alcohol and substance use problems,
many go without treatment—in part because their disorders go
undiagnosed. Regular screenings enable earlier identification.
Screenings should be provided to people of all ages, even the young
and the elderly.
862
The Alcohol Use Disorders Identification Test (AUDIT) is a 10-item
questionnaire that screens for hazardous or harmful alcohol
consumption. Developed by the World Health Organization (WHO), the
test correctly classifies 95% of people into either alcoholics or non-
alcoholics. The AUDIT is particularly suitable for use in primary care
settings and has been used with a variety of populations and cultural
groups. It should be administered by a health professional or
paraprofessional
The SCOFF Questionnaire is a five-question screening tool designed to
clarify suspicion that an eating disorder might exist rather than to make
a diagnosis. The questions can be delivered either verbally or in written
form.
The Minimum Data Set (MDS) is a standardized, comprehensive
assessment of an adult’s functional, medical, psychosocial, and
cognitive status. It is commonly used in long-term care facilities and
outpatient and home-based social service programs for older adults.
While most questions on the examination will not be this specific, there
are always a few that require very specific knowledge. It is important not
to get nervous when such questions arise as these select few can be
missed and still get a passing score. In these instances, it is helpful to
try to eliminate any incorrect response choices to increase the chances
of selecting the correct answer.
Question Assesses
Assessment, Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning
46. C. Defense mechanisms are unconscious mechanisms which are
activated in times of anxiety, stress, and distress without any choice or
conscious intentionality. They are a necessary tool of protection and in
moderate use contribute to successful adaptation. Defense mechanisms
are a part of normal functioning, but they can be considered as
pathological in some instances.
Coping, on the other hand, includes conscious strategies that enable
clients to attain realistic goals by using available resources and past
experiences while acting within society’s rules of conduct. While
defense mechanisms are unconscious processes whereas coping
methods are conscious, in reality, sometimes clients exhibit rational
coping simultaneously with unconscious defenses.
863
Coping mechanisms are often confused and interchanged with defense
mechanisms due to their similarities. Both processes are activated in
times of adversity. Defense mechanisms and coping strategies reduce
arousal of negative emotions. Furthermore, both processes aim at
achieving adaptation; only the means to the end differ. Defenses help
the individual by distorting reality and coping strategies attempt to solve
the problem, thus changing the reality. Coping behaviors involve
conscious modification of cognitive and emotional appraisals, which
eventually modify the reactions to the stressful event rather than distort
the perception of the event. Clients have full control of coping strategies
used. They can choose to stop certain coping styles and choose others.
Defense mechanisms, on the other hand, operate outside
consciousness and awareness. Clients cannot intentionally choose to
use other defense mechanisms.
Coping involves flexibility, and defenses are more rigid. The choice of
coping mechanisms is perceived more as dependent on timing,
situation, and personality factors. Different situations lead to different
coping strategies. Defense mechanisms are more stable and habitual.
The idea regarding whether defense mechanisms produce adaptive and
functional behaviors is still controversial. In the long term, defense
mechanisms do contribute to the development of severe pathology, yet
the fact that they seem to help individuals to cope in the short term
should not be ignored or dismissed. Defenses are efficient mechanisms
that help deal with threatening and, at times, traumatic stressors.
Pathology probably does not originate from the actual use of defense
mechanisms; it is caused by a continuous reliance on defenses, instead
of actually attempting to solve the core problems that cause their
necessity in the first place.
The incorrect response choices are not accurate. Coping mechanisms
are not “unconscious actions.” Additionally, defense mechanisms can
be adaptive and functional ways to deal with stress.
Question Assesses
Human Development, Diversity, and Behavior in the Environment
47. C. Feedback during engagement in the problem-solving process
encourages clients to comment about treatment purpose, social
worker/client roles, policy or ethical factors, and so on. An important part
864
of communicating effectively involves checking to see whether clients
have understood social workers’ messages. Seeking feedback serves
this function. In addition, seeking feedback is essential for informed
consent by inviting clients to identify areas that are unclear, share
thoughts that have occurred to them, introduce new topics, or express
disagreement. By seeking feedback, social workers effectively send
messages that treatment is a mutual and reciprocal process. Social
workers convey that they are genuinely interested in what clients have to
say and there is a desire to have them actively participate in the
process.
Social workers routinely seek feedback throughout the problem-solving
process by asking, “How does that sound to you?” Other feedback can
be elicited by inquiring, “What do you think about what we have talked
about so far?” It is also good to find out about client questions or
comments.
In this question, the social worker is “in an initial meeting with a man,”
indicating that engagement is occurring. During engagement, a social
worker should begin to form a working alliance with a client. A client
should feel respected and understand that a social worker can be a
valuable resource toward making change but cannot solve a client’s
problems and is not there to tell the client what to do.
The social worker’s question demonstrates to the client that his opinions
about treatment matter despite the involuntary nature of the service. It
aims to get the client talking about his feelings, which is the first step in
forming a therapeutic relationship. While the client may reveal some
resistance when answering, the question is not aimed to do so. It also
does not seek to determine if denial is present or identify whether the
client is aware of his legal mandates. These are assessment tasks
which will occur later. Assessment follows engagement in the problem-
solving process. In addition, a social worker should not make
assumptions about the presence of resistance or denial just because a
client is mandated into services.
Universal among involuntary clients is that other entities have the power
to influence terms of their treatment, which may make them feel that
they have less control in the process. Social workers can address this
issue by eliciting their feedback, sending the message that their input is
essential.
Question Assesses
865
Psychotherapy, Clinical Interventions, and Case Management
48. B. Symbolic interactionism sees clients as active in shaping their world,
rather than as entities who are acted upon by society. With symbolic
interactionism, reality is seen as social, developed interaction with
others. Symbolic interactionists believe physical reality exists based
upon clients’ social definitions, and that social definitions develop in part
or in relation to something “real.” Thus, clients do not respond to this
reality directly, but rather to the social understanding of reality; that is,
they respond to this reality indirectly through a kind of filter which
consists of clients’ different perspectives. This perspective is based on
three premises:
■ Clients act toward things on the basis of the meanings they ascrib
those things.
■ The meaning of such things is derived from, or arises out of, the so
interaction that they have with others and society.
■ These meanings are handled in, and modified through, an interpreta
process used by clients in dealing with the things encountered.
Essentially, clients behave toward objects and others based on the
personal meanings that they have already given these items. The
second premise explains the meaning of such things is derived from, or
arises out of, the social interaction that one has with other humans.
Lastly, clients interact with each other by interpreting or defining each
other’s actions instead of merely reacting to each other’s actions.
Therefore, responses are not made directly to the actions of one
another, but instead are based on the meaning which clients attach to
such actions.
Thus, the interaction of intimate couples involves shared
understandings of their situations. Spouses have different styles of
communication, and social class affects the expectations that spouses
have of their marriages and of each other. Marital problems stem from
different understandings and expectations that spouses have of their
marriage.
In functionalism, marriage performs several essential functions for
society. It socializes children, it provides emotional and practical support
for its members, it helps regulate sexual activity and sexual
reproduction, and it provides its members with a social identity. Marital
problems stem from sudden or far-reaching changes in the structure or
866
processes; these problems threaten the marital stability and weaken
society.
Psychodynamic models focus on the dynamic relations between the
conscious and unconscious mind and explore how these psychological
forces might relate to early childhood experiences.
This is a recall question which requires knowledge of various theories,
perspectives, and treatment approaches. When response choices
consist of proper names in recall questions, it is often wise to look at
them first and ruminate about the theories, perspectives, and treatment
approaches before reading the questions. Getting the question correct
requires some basic knowledge about each of the response choices to
assist with selection or elimination.
Question Assesses
Human Development, Diversity, and Behavior in the Environment
49. C. Social workers’ commitment to informed consent is based on clients’
right to self-determination. The informed consent process is one of the
clearest expressions of social workers’ respect for clients’ dignity and
worth as individuals to make choices which are best suited to meet their
needs.
A client should have the right to refuse or withdraw consent. Social
workers should be prepared for the possibility that clients will exercise
these rights. Social workers should inform clients of their rights and help
clients make thoughtful and informed decisions based on all available
facts and information about potential benefits and risks.
Social workers should be familiar with informed consent requirements
concerning clients’ right to consent, especially when working with those
who are incarcerated, children, individuals with cognitive impairments,
and so on.
While laws and regulations vary in interpretations and applications of
informed consent standards, there are essential standards in all
processes which are needed for their validity. First, coercion and undue
influence must not have played a role in clients’ decisions. As social
workers often maintain control over approving benefits, admission into
programs, and the termination of services, they should ensure that
clients do not feel pressured to grant consent based upon this control.
867
Second, social workers should not present clients with general, broadly
worded consent forms that may violate clients’ right to be informed and
may be considered invalid if challenged in a court of law. The use of
broad or blank consent forms cannot possibly constitute informed
consent. Social workers should include details that refer to specific
activities, information to be released, or interventions. Typical elements
include details of the nature and purpose of a service or disclosure of
information; advantages and disadvantages of an intervention;
substantial or possible risks to clients, if any; potential effects on clients’
families, jobs, social activities, and other important aspects of their lives;
alternatives to the proposed intervention or disclosure; and anticipated
costs for clients. This information should be presented to clients in clear,
understandable language. Consent forms should be dated and include
a reasonable expiration date.
Third, clients must be mentally capable of providing legal consent.
Clients with significant permanent cognitive deficits may be unable to
comprehend the consent procedure. Social workers should assess
clients’ ability to reason and make informed choices, comprehend
relevant facts and retain this information, appreciate current
circumstances, and communicate wishes. Some clients may be only
temporarily unable to consent, such as individuals who are under the
influence of alcohol or other drugs or are experiencing transient
cognitive symptoms at the time consent is sought. Clients who are
unable to consent at a given moment may be able to consent in the
future if the incapacity is temporary.
The use of drugs has interfered with the man’s ability to give informed
consent. It is not appropriate to waive consent procedures. Verbal
consent procedures are also problematic as “the social worker
questions his ability to understand what she is asking.” Thus, he cannot
give consent if he is unable to understand parameters of the information
to be gathered or the services to be delivered (the nature and purpose
of the service; the advantages and disadvantages of an intervention;
substantial or possible risks; anticipated costs; and so on).
His impairment may be temporary as he admits to using drugs which
interfered with his reasoning prior to the meeting. Arranging to meet him
at a later time may result in him being in a mental state in which he can
make informed choices and comprehend relevant facts, which are
necessary elements for informed consent.
Question Assesses
868
Professional Values and Ethics
50. A. Developing goals, objectives, and interventions is critical to alleviating
client problems. The document that contains the problem statement,
goals, objectives, and methods is the intervention, treatment, or service
plan (contract). It is a road map that outlines the journey from problems
that are identified through assessment to life when those issues have
been successfully addressed.
The first step in any helping process is to identify the solvable problem
and why a client is seeking help now. Once the problem is identified,
goals and objectives can be specified that will help toward a solution.
Goals are long-term, general, and often the opposite of the problem.
The most basic goal should be for a client to be able to function at the
level of functioning before the current problem started. This baseline is
referred to as premorbid functioning.
The specific steps taken to achieve the goal are called objectives.
Objectives are short term and specify who does the action, for how
long, and how often to achieve the desired outcome (who will do what
by when). Because the goals and objectives derive from the
assessment, the frequency of the desired outcome should not be made
up out of thin air. Using the frequency before the problem starts and
working backwards is helpful. Being realistic and precise in targets will
assist in achieving success. Considering premorbid functioning ensures
that goals and objectives are not set too high.
Strategies are the means by which treatment goals are achieved. Each
objective can have more than one intervention. Interventions are
typically specific to varying theoretical approaches.
The identified objective was to meet friends, which is not happening
now. If she met friends weekly in the past, prior to her feelings of
worthlessness, the objective would be to engage in that behavior again.
Thus, it is critical to understand the frequency of the behavior so a
measurable target can be established.
Question Assesses
Psychotherapy, Clinical Interventions, and Case Management
51. B. In addition to the typical diagnosis of bipolar I disorder, further
information about the mood can be denoted with a “specifier.” A specifier
869
is an extension to the diagnosis that further clarifies the course, severity,
or special features of the disorder or illness. One specifier is “with
anxious distress.” The “with anxious distress” specifier means that
during periods of mania, hypomania, or depression, clients also have
anxiety symptoms. The symptoms include feeling tense, feeling
especially restless, problems concentrating due to worry, fear that
something terrible will happen, and feeling a loss of control. The intensity
ranges from mild to severe, depending on how many symptoms are
present.
The difference between this specifier and having an anxiety disorder,
such as generalized anxiety disorder or panic disorder, is that these
symptoms are only present during mood episodes related to bipolar
disorder. When a client’s mood is normal, the anxiety will be gone.
Having bipolar disorder with anxious distress means clients have bipolar
disorder, plus anxiety that interferes with life, but do not meet the
diagnostic criteria of an anxiety disorder.
High levels of anxiety have been associated with higher suicide risk,
longer duration of illness, and greater likelihood of treatment
nonresponse. As a result, it is clinically useful to specify accurately the
presence and severity levels of anxious distress for treatment planning
and monitoring of response to treatment.
In order to add the specifier “with anxious distress,” at least two of these
symptoms should be present:
■ Feeling tense or keyed up
■ Unusual restlessness
■ Worry that makes it difficult to concentrate
■ Fear that something terrible may happen
■ Feeling that clients might lose control
The symptoms have to be present most days of the current or most
recent bipolar episode, regardless of whether the episode involved
manic, hypomanic, or depressive symptoms.
The severity of the condition is determined by the number of symptoms
present: two symptoms mean the condition is mild, three symptoms
mean it is moderate, four to five symptoms mean it is moderate to
870
severe, and 4 to 5 symptoms with psychomotor agitation means it is
severe.
Clients with bipolar disorder with anxious distress also can be
diagnosed with other anxiety disorders. For example, if they get panic
attacks, they can be diagnosed with panic disorder, and if they are
acutely afraid of a specific object or situation (e.g., spiders or flying),
then they could be diagnosed with specific phobia.
When two or more illnesses not related to each other are diagnosed in a
single client, they are called “comorbid,” which simply means they occur
together.
Anxiety disorders that frequently have been diagnosed together with
bipolar disorder include:
■ Panic disorder
■ Generalized anxiety disorder
■ Obsessive compulsive disorders
■ Social anxiety disorder (social phobia)
■ Agoraphobia
■ Specific phobia
Other specifiers for bipolar disorder include:
■ With rapid cycling
■ With melancholic features
■ With atypical features
■ With mood-congruent psychotic features or with mood-incongr
psychotic features
■ With catatonia
■ With peripartum onset
■ With seasonal pattern
This is a recall question about the use of specifiers with diagnosed
mental disorders. Social workers should be familiar with the criteria
associated with their use and know when they are to be appropriately
added.
871
Question Assesses
Assessment, Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning
52. A. Understanding the impact of caregiving includes understanding
transitions into and out of caregiving.
There is much evidence on the health effects of caregiving. Providing
assistance with basic activities of daily living (ADLs) has resulted in
increased depression and psychological distress, impaired self-care,
and poorer self-reported health.
Also studied are the effects of making the transition out of the
caregiving role because individuals improve, enter institutions, or die.
Improved functioning of care recipients is associated with reductions in
caregiver distress. The death of the care recipient has been found to
reduce caregiver depression, and caregivers are often able to return to
normal levels of functioning within a year. However, the effects of a
transition to a nursing home are less positive, with caregivers continuing
to exhibit the same level of psychiatric morbidity after placement. While
nursing home placements may reduce the strain associated with
physical assistance, family members often still have responsibilities
associated with caregiving, including the added financial burden of
paying for out-of-home care and/or losing complete control over the
delivery of services.
Question Assesses
Human Development, Diversity, and Behavior in the Environment
53. B. There are several specifiers for obsessive-compulsive and related
disorders. Specifiers are extensions to a diagnosis that further clarify its
course, severity, or special features. The “with poor insight” specifier for
obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) distinguishes between individuals
with “good or fair insight,” “poor insight,” and “absent insight/delusional”
OCD beliefs (i.e., complete conviction that OCD beliefs are true).
According to the DSM, one of the diagnostic criteria for OCD is that the
person at some point in time has recognized that the obsessions or
compulsions they experience are “excessive or unreasonable.” This
acknowledgment of the irrational nature of the OCD symptoms has
been coined “insight.” However, social workers who treat clients with
OCD observe that they do not always seem to recognize or agree that
872
their obsessions and compulsions do not make sense. Insight into OCD
symptoms exists on a continuum, with some clients completely
acknowledging that their symptoms do not make sense, and others
having a very strong belief in the validity of their obsessions and
compulsions.
Although there is some disagreement, poor or absent insight into OCD
symptoms is generally thought to predict a worse response to both
psychological and medical treatments for OCD. Poor or absent insight
may make it difficult for the client to get up the motivation to do the hard
work that therapy requires or to stick with taking a medication daily,
especially if there are initial side effects that are unpleasant. Clients with
less insight may also be less likely to attend regular appointments or to
contact social workers in the first place.
Question Assesses
Assessment, Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning
54. A. Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a neurodevelopmental disorder,
characterized by severe and pervasive impairments in reciprocal social
communication and social interaction (verbal and nonverbal), and by
restricted, repetitive patterns of behavior, interests, and activities. There
are specifiers that can be used to describe features such as “with or
without intellectual impairment,” “with or without language impairment,”
“associated with known medical or genetic condition or environmental
factor,” “associated with another neurodevelopmental, mental, or
behavioral disorder,” and “with catatonia.” The question is asking about
which response choice is not a specifier. Understanding the nature of
ASD may assist as intellectual impairment and language impairment can
be, but do not have to be, comorbid. “Associated with psychosocial
stressors” is not a specifier for ASD as those with this disorder find
typical social interactions stressful.
Question Assesses
Assessment, Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning
55. B. Despite advances in human rights and acceptance, stigma, both
internal and external, continues to be the greatest problem facing sexual
and gender minorities. Internally, many people who are lesbian, gay,
bisexual, transgender, queer, or intersex (LGBTQI) develop an
internalized homophobia that can contribute to problems with self-
873
acceptance, anxiety, depression, difficulty forming intimate relationships,
and being open about what sexual orientation or gender identity one
actually has. Externally, stigma may be exhibited by the surrounding
society and even from within the LGBTQI community. For example,
some people who are gay or lesbian may have difficulty accepting those
who are bisexual. People who are transgender also have historically
been excluded from some gay organizations.
In addition, most people who are LGBTQI are not raised by people who
identify as LGBTQI. Accordingly, they might not have the ability to seek
support from parents or peers who may understand these struggles.
Lastly, those who are LGBTQI struggle with higher rates of anxiety,
depression, and substance use disorders. Many have struggled with
stigma and the self-acceptance process. Alarmingly, those who are
LGBTQI have higher rates of suicide or suicidal behavior.
They are also at greater risk for discrimination, verbal abuse, physical
assaults and violence, and so on. Though legal protections have been
increasing, fear of potential discrimination contributes to not seeking
needed help.
The scenario also asks about appropriate actions “in assisting the client
to formulate treatment goals,” which is part of planning in the problem-
solving process. Exploring familial relationships is an assessment task
which would have happened prior to planning. Lastly, role modeling can
be effective, but represents an intervention. For goal setting to occur,
there should be an identification of the people whose acceptance is
important to the client.
Question Assesses
Human Development, Diversity, and Behavior in the Environment
56. C. Many ethical standards speak to the professional boundaries that
social workers should maintain with clients. Social workers should
ensure that they do not engage in dual or multiple relationships that may
impact on the treatment of clients. Social workers should be alert to and
avoid conflicts of interest that interfere with the exercise of professional
discretion and impartial judgment. Social workers should avoid potential
or real conflicts of interest. Dual relationships can be simultaneous or
consecutive.
874
The social worker cannot commence a relationship with the student
given the presence of a dual relationship. The student may not be able
to be honest with the social worker if therapy were to begin, given a
belief that what would be disclosed may impact standing in the social
work program. Contrarily, the social worker may receive information that
would otherwise not be known by a faculty member, calling into
question the ability of the student to competently practice. Even though
the social worker did not have the student in class, there is a conflict of
interest as the social worker is a faculty member in the program.
Meeting with the student to learn more about the problem is
inappropriate given the presence of an existing relationship. Lastly,
speaking to the program director also should not be done. Informing the
student that services cannot be provided is the ethical action and helps
the student learn about appropriate boundaries.
Question Assesses
Professional Values and Ethics
57. C. Schizophrenia is a brain disorder that affects how clients think, feel,
and perceive. The hallmark symptom of schizophrenia is psychosis,
such as experiencing auditory hallucinations (voices) and delusions
(fixed false beliefs).
Clients with the disorder may hear voices or see things that are not
there. They may believe other people are reading their minds,
controlling their thoughts, or plotting to harm them. This can be scary
and upsetting to clients with the illness and make them withdrawn or
extremely agitated. It can also be scary and upsetting to others around
them.
Clients with schizophrenia may sometimes talk about strange or
unusual ideas, which can make it difficult to carry on a conversation.
They may sit for hours without moving or talking. Sometimes clients with
schizophrenia seem perfectly fine until they talk about what they are
really thinking.
The symptoms of schizophrenia fall into three broad categories:
positive, negative, and cognitive symptoms.
Positive symptoms are psychotic behaviors not generally seen in
healthy people. Clients with positive symptoms may “lose touch” with
some aspects of reality. For some, these symptoms come and go. For
875
others, they stay stable over time. Sometimes they are severe, and at
other times they are hardly noticeable. The severity of positive
symptoms may depend on whether a client is receiving treatment.
Hallucinations are sensory experiences that occur in the absence of a
stimulus. These can occur in any of the five senses (vision, hearing,
smell, taste, or touch). “Voices” (auditory hallucinations) are the most
common type of hallucination in schizophrenia. Many clients with the
disorder hear voices. The voices can either be internal, seeming to
come from within one’s own mind, or they can be external, in which
case they can seem to be as real as another person speaking.
Sometimes clients with schizophrenia talk to the voices that they hear.
Clients with schizophrenia may hear voices for a long time before family
and friends notice the problem.
Other types of hallucinations include seeing people or objects that are
not there, smelling odors that no one else detects, and feeling things
like invisible fingers touching their bodies when no one is nearby.
Delusions are strongly held false beliefs that are not consistent with a
client’s culture. Delusions persist even when there is evidence that the
beliefs are not true or logical. Clients with schizophrenia can have
delusions that seem bizarre, such as believing that neighbors can
control their behavior with magnetic waves. They may also believe that
people on television are directing special messages to them, or that
radio stations are broadcasting their thoughts aloud to others.
Thought disorders are unusual or dysfunctional ways of thinking. One
form is called “disorganized thinking.” This is when a client has trouble
organizing thoughts or connecting them logically. The client may talk in
a garbled way that is hard to understand.
Movement disorders may appear as agitated body movements. A client
with a movement disorder may repeat certain motions over and over. In
the other extreme, a client may become catatonic. Catatonia is a state
in which a client does not move and does not respond to others.
Negative symptoms are associated with disruptions to normal emotions
and behaviors. These symptoms are harder to recognize as part of the
disorder and can be mistaken for depression or other conditions.
These symptoms include the following:
■ “Flat affect” (reduced expression of emotions via facial expression or v
876
tone)
■ Diminished feelings of pleasure in everyday life
■ Difficulty beginning and sustaining activities
■ Reduced speaking
Clients with negative symptoms may need help with everyday tasks.
They may neglect basic personal hygiene. This may make them seem
lazy or unwilling to help themselves, but the problems are symptoms
caused by schizophrenia.
For some, the cognitive symptoms of schizophrenia are subtle, but for
others, they are more severe; clients may notice changes in their
memory or other aspects of thinking. Similar to negative symptoms,
cognitive symptoms may be difficult to recognize as part of the disorder.
Often, they are detected only when specific tests are performed.
Cognitive symptoms include the following:
■ Poor “executive functioning” (the ability to understand information and
it to make decisions)
■ Trouble focusing or paying attention
■ Problems with “working memory” (the ability to use informa
immediately after learning it)
Poor cognition is related to worse employment and social outcomes and
can be distressing to clients with schizophrenia.
This question is particularly tricky as all the response choices are, in
fact, symptoms of schizophrenia. However, the correct answer is a
negative symptom—not a positive one. It is necessary to know the
difference between negative, positive, and cognitive symptoms of
schizophrenia to answer correctly.
Question Assesses
Assessment, Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning
58. C. Engagement with mandated clients takes skill and patience. Most
therapeutic models are based on the assumption that the process of
therapy will be a voluntary endeavor in which both clients and social
workers will engage in therapeutic relationships through mutual consent.
877
While clients often seek mental health services due to realizing they
have a problem, many may also be referred involuntarily to mental
health professionals for treatment. Mandated clients are individuals who
are sent or brought by someone else for treatment, including courts,
protective service agencies, employment assistance programs, schools,
and so on. Clients mandated for therapy may indicate the insistence of
others as their reasons for coming to therapy, present themselves as not
needing help, or demonstrate little willingness to establish a relationship
with social workers. The involuntary nature of the relationship could
present hurdles early on in the therapeutic process, making it
exasperating for both social workers and their involuntary clients. Clients
mandated into therapy may view the process of therapy as being forced
upon them, with social workers representing yet another part of the legal
system. On the other hand, social workers may anticipate certain
attitudes in mandated clients and label them as resistant, unmotivated,
uncooperative, involuntary, defiant, reluctant, difficult, or noncompliant.
The question contains a qualifying word—MOST. While the
apprehension by the client to speak to the social worker in the scenario
may be an indication of more than one of the response choices listed, it
is likely related to the involuntary nature of the relationship. The client
might be fearful about sharing information. However, it is unlikely that
the client would be providing information in the first session that would
be highly sensitive. The question also states that the client is
apprehensive to discuss mandated services—not current problems. The
discussion of mandated services would not likely be personal in nature.
The first session focuses on engagement and the formation of a
therapeutic alliance. It is likely that the client will be upset about being
told to see the social worker, regardless of a willingness to make
changes. The assumption that legally mandated clients will not
contemplate change and voluntary clients are open to modifying
behavior is not supported by research. Those who are court-ordered
into treatment often have made decisions that changes are needed.
However, they need to learn to trust social workers who they did not
choose to see. Acknowledging clients’ lack of choice during the first
meeting can often be common ground upon which to build relationships
in the future.
Question Assesses
Psychotherapy, Clinical Interventions, and Case Management
878
59. C. Narrative therapy is a method of therapy that separates a client from
a problem and encourages clients to rely on their own skill sets to
minimize problems that exist in their everyday lives. Throughout life,
personal experiences are transformed into personal stories that are
given meaning and help shape a client’s identity; narrative therapy
utilizes the power of clients’ personal stories to discover their life
purpose.
Narrative therapy was created as a nonpathologizing, empowering, and
collaborative form of therapy that recognizes that clients possess
natural competencies, skills, and expertise that can help guide change
in their lives. Clients are viewed as separate from their problems, and in
this way, social workers can help externalize sensitive issues. This
objectification dissipates resistance and defenses and allows a client to
address this issue in a more productive manner. By externalizing
problems, clients see that problems can be separated from their
identities or sense of self (ego) and therefore can be removed or
changed. It can be very empowering for clients to see themselves as
separate from, and having control over, “problems.”
Rather than transforming a client, narrative therapy aims to transform
the effects of a problem. The objective is to get some distance from the
issue; in this way, it is possible to see how a particular concern is
serving a client, rather than harming the client. For example,
posttraumatic stress might help protect a client from the difficult
emotions associated with a particular event, although it also contributes
a host of new troubling symptoms, such as anxiety. This process of
externalization can help a client develop greater self-compassion,
which, in turn, can help the client feel more capable of change. Social
workers using narrative therapy help clients view their problems within
the context of social, political, and cultural storylines that influence the
way they view themselves and their personal stories.
Social workers who use narrative therapy believe that simply telling
one’s story of a problem is a form of action toward change. They help to
objectify problems, frame them within a larger sociocultural context, and
make room for other stories. Together, a social worker and client identify
and build upon “alternative” or “preferred” storylines that exist beyond
the problem story; these provide contrast to the problem, reflect a
client’s true nature, and offer opportunities to rewrite the story. In this
way, clients move from what is known (problem stories) to what is yet
unknown. By exploring the impact of a problem, it is possible to identify
879
what is truly important and valuable to a client in a broader context
beyond the problem.
Question Assesses
Psychotherapy, Clinical Interventions, and Case Management
60. B. Self-monitoring is a key feature of cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT)
for feeding and eating disorders. It provides a detailed measure of eating
problems and the circumstances under which they occur. It indexes the
progress of treatment and helps guide the focus of each therapy
session. Food diaries are self-monitoring tools.
One of the reasons self-monitoring is so helpful is that it can be very
difficult to recall thoughts, feelings, or behaviors after some time has
passed. In the moment, self-monitoring makes it possible to get an
accurate picture of what is really going on with eating behavior. This can
be an important tool when clients are working to change behaviors or
problems.
CBT focuses on the relationship between thoughts, feelings, and
behaviors. Social workers assist clients in identifying patterns of
irrational and self-destructive thoughts and behaviors that influence
emotions.
Task-centered practice is a short-term treatment where clients establish
specific, measurable goals. Social workers and clients collaborate
together and create specific strategies and steps to begin reaching
those goals.
Narrative therapy externalizes a person’s problem by examining the
story of the person’s life. In the story, the client is not defined by the
problem, and the problem exists as a separate entity. Instead of
focusing on a client’s depression, in this social work practice model, a
client would be encouraged to fight against the depression by looking at
the skills and abilities that may have previously been taken for granted.
The question contains a qualifying word—MOST. While self-monitoring
may be used in various social work practice models, it is a common
cognitive behavioral technique with Socratic questioning, homework,
behavioral experiments, systematic desensitization, and so on. CBT is
also effectively used with feeding and eating disorders, which may be
an additional clue as to the correct answer.
880
Question Assesses
Psychotherapy, Clinical Interventions, and Case Management
61. B. Hegemony refers to the leadership, dominance, or great influence
that one entity or group of people has over others. Historically, this term
often referred to a country that exerted power over other countries
indirectly rather than through military force. Modern uses often refer to a
group in a society having power over others within that society. For
example, the wealthy class might be said to have hegemony over the
poor because of its ability to use its money to influence many aspects of
society and government. Wealthy individuals can contribute the most
money to the campaigns of certain political candidates, political parties,
or causes. To ensure reelection or continued contributions, government
officials who use those funds might then pass laws or create policies that
favor those who contributed to the campaigns. People who do not have
the money to contribute, however, are unable to influence the
government in the same way.
This word is derived from the Greek verb hegeisthai, which translates
as “to lead.” Early leaders who were able to exert control and influence
over a group of people might be referred to as hegemons. A hegemon
had to have the support from at least one dominant class of people to
keep the population as a whole from rebelling against the leadership. A
single country might also be considered to be hegemonical if it has
enough power to influence the way that other countries behave.
The question contains a qualifying word—BEST. While all the response
choices relate to diversity among groups and/or its impact on values,
only the correct answer speaks to the power to “lead” or dominate,
which is the essence of hegemony. Social workers should be familiar
with key concepts and terms related to social work practice, including
those related to morals and beliefs that are consistent with and
antithetical to the profession.
Question Assesses
Human Development, Diversity, and Behavior in the Environment
62. C. Borderline personality disorder (BPD) is characterized by emotional
instability, distress, and neurosis. Clients with this disorder tend to
experience difficulty in forming stable relationships. A paranoid fear of
being abandoned haunts these clients, and this fear frequently becomes
881
a self-fulfilling prophecy. Angry outbursts are common. Clients with BPD
tend to view people in black and white, idealizing someone one day and
devaluing that person the next.
Clients with BPD have an increased incidence of childhood neglect and
abuse. Many clients who have been diagnosed with BPD are told that
their chronic disorder is not treatable. However, BPD can have a good
prognosis if properly treated. Specialized psychotherapy can
significantly improve the lives of individuals with this debilitating
disorder.
Major research has been conducted on the prognosis of clients with
BPD. A major finding was that the remission rate went from about 30%
to 50% by the second-year follow-up, and up to about 80% by the 10th
year. Thus, remission of symptoms is more frequent than what
researchers and clinicians previously believed.
Question Assesses
Assessment, Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning
63. B. Several hundred screening instruments are available today to aid
social workers and others in identifying clients with alcohol problems.
One instrument in particular, the CAGE assessment, is useful in a
variety of settings and with a range of target populations. CAGE is an
acronym for its four questions; the instrument is a widely used screening
test for problem drinking and potential alcohol problems. Instrument
administration takes <1 minute and is often used in primary care or other
general settings as a quick screening tool rather than as an in-depth
interview for those who have alcoholism. The CAGE instrument does not
have a specific intended population, and it is meant to find those who
drink excessively and need treatment. The CAGE questionnaire is
reliable and valid; however, it is not valid for diagnosis of other
substance use disorders, although somewhat modified versions of the
CAGE questionnaire have been frequently implemented for such a
purpose.
The CAGE is designed as a self-report questionnaire. Because talking
about drinking behavior can be uncomfortable or stigmatized, client
responses may be subject to social desirability bias. The honesty and
accuracy of responses may improve if clients trust social workers doing
the interviews. Responses also may be more honest when the form is
completed online, on a computer, or in other anonymous formats.
882
The CAGE assessment can identify alcohol problems over the lifetime.
Two positive responses to the questions are considered a positive test
and indicate further assessment is warranted.
C: Have you ever felt you should cut down on your drinking?
A: Have people annoyed you by criticizing your drinking?
G: Have you ever felt bad or guilty about your drinking?
E: Eye opener: Have you ever had a drink first thing in the morning to
steady your nerves or to get rid of a hangover?
Addiction—or compulsive alcohol or drug use despite harmful
consequences—is characterized by an inability to stop using alcohol or
drugs; failure to meet work, social, or family obligations; and sometimes
(depending on the drug), tolerance and withdrawal. The latter reflect
physical dependence in which the body adapts to the drug, requiring
more of it to achieve a certain effect (tolerance) and eliciting drug-
specific physical or mental symptoms if drug use is abruptly ceased
(withdrawal). Physical dependence can happen with the chronic use of
many drugs—including many prescription drugs, even if taken as
instructed. Thus, physical dependence in and of itself does not
constitute addiction, but it often accompanies addiction.
Question Assesses
Assessment, Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning
64. A. Resisting disclosure of privileged information is required to protect
the confidentiality of clients. Social workers should employ varying
methods to protect the confidentiality of clients during legal proceedings
to the extent permitted by law. When a court of law or other legally
authorized body orders social workers to disclose confidential or
privileged information without a client’s consent and such disclosure
could cause harm to the client, social workers should request that the
court withdraw the order or limit the order as narrowly as possible or
maintain the records under seal, unavailable for public inspection.
Social workers can use several additional strategies to protect clients’
confidentiality during legal proceedings. If social workers believe court
orders are unwarranted or without merit, they can arrange for lawyers to
file motions asking the court to rule that the requests are inappropriate.
In addition, social workers may request that judges review clinical notes
and records in chambers to protect confidentiality and then rule on
whether the information should be revealed in open court and made a
883
matter of public record. Judges may issue a protective order explicitly
limiting the disclosure of specific privileged information to certain
portions of social workers’ clinical notes or certain aspects of
interpersonal communications.
Social workers are instinctively inclined to protect clients’ confidentiality.
Clients’ legal right to privileged communication strengthens social
workers’ ability to protect clients. To fulfill their ethical duty, social
workers should be familiar with the concept of privileged
communication, practical steps they can take to protect clients, and
exceptions to clients’ right to privileged information.
Redacting information is not recommended when a social worker
receives a court order which mandates release of information which can
be harmful without client consent. This action is probably prohibited by
law as the court has requested the information in its entirety. In addition,
if a social worker is successful in getting the court to withdraw an order,
it would be better to not submit any documentation even if the most
sensitive parts have been redacted. Lastly, while asking for the records
to be maintained under seal is an option, it is not the MOST appropriate
one as it does not provide the greatest protection afforded by having the
court withdraw the order, if deemed appropriate by a judge.
Question Assesses
Professional Values and Ethics
65. B. Professional development ensures that social workers continue to
strengthen their skills and learn throughout their career. The most
effective professional development engages social workers to focus on
meeting the needs of their clients. Social workers learn new skills and
competencies to ensure clients receive the most effective and efficient
services possible.
Professional development refers to many types of educational
experiences. Social workers participate in professional development to
learn and apply new knowledge and skills that will improve service
delivery.
Effective professional development enables social workers to develop
the knowledge and skills they need to address complex client problems.
To be effective, professional development requires thoughtful planning
followed by careful implementation with feedback to ensure it responds
884
to social workers’ needs. Social workers who participate in professional
development then should put their new knowledge and skills to work.
Professional development is not effective unless it causes social
workers to learn new theory and techniques aimed at helping clients
reach their goals.
This question contains a qualifying word—BEST. While the incorrect
response choices may be reasons that social workers engage in
professional development, the correct answer focuses on its benefits for
improved practice. Correct answers on the examination are always
ones that focus on the delivery of effective services and place client
needs above agency policy, regulatory requirements, and employment
considerations.
Question Assesses
Professional Values and Ethics
66. B. Interaction of people, organizations, and governments is the process
of globalization. The process is determined by trade between the
nations, investments in their businesses, and data gathered through
information technology and has some effects on the cultural,
environmental, political, and economic development of the countries.
Globalization can have both negative and positive effects on quality of
life.
Cultural convergence means bringing together different cultural groups,
which results in these cultures becoming more alike in terms of
technology, sports, language, and even politics.
Globalization and culture are interdependent. Globalization lies at the
heart of modern cultural; culture practices lie at the heart of
globalization. Their relationship is reciprocal.
History shows that contact between different cultures leads to trade of
products between them or globalization. Travelers and merchants from
one culture to another culture bring products with them which allow
people to know about the other culture and its products. Technology has
made nations know about other nations and even adopt their customs if
they like them.
Globalization is resulting in greater homogeneity around the globe, but it
is also said that globalization is demolishing local cultures and
885
traditions. Thus, there are positive and negative impacts of
globalization.
The question contains a qualifying word—MOST. Though some of the
incorrect response choices can lead to cultural convergence,
globalization is the greatest or most significant contributor. Globalization
causes the greatest interaction between people, which results in cultural
convergence. Social workers should be familiar with how human
behavior changes as a result of the interactions of those from different
societies and parts of the world.
Question Assesses
Human Development, Diversity, and Behavior in the Environment
67. B. Gender identity is an individual sense of femaleness or maleness or
neither or both. It is also, to some degree, a social construction that
traditionally has categorized certain behaviors into primarily binary, male
and female, roles. Gender identity conflicts can stem from gender
identity not matching an individual’s biological sex, gender identity being
neither completely male nor female, or biological sex not being uniquely
male or female. The use of Latinx began more than a decade ago and is
the gender-neutral alternative to Latino or Latina. The use of Latinx is
gaining popularity as part of an effort to move beyond gender binary and
be inclusive of the intersecting identities of Latin American descendants.
Latinx makes room for people who are trans, queer, agender, nonbinary,
gender nonconforming, or gender fluid. In Spanish, the masculinized
version of words is considered gender neutral, but that does not work
for some who think it is inappropriate to assign masculinity as gender
neutral. The use of “x” is a way of rejecting the gendering of words and
recognition that language changes in order to accommodate the times
in which it is used.
Though people may not identify as Latinx for various reasons, it is
important to respect others who do and who want to be referred to as
such. Latinx is a way to be more inclusive of identities that go beyond
gender norms that are rapidly shifting and being redefined in today’s
culture. It is seen by some as vital to expressing who they are and being
able to explain it to others.
This question requires knowledge of a specific term related to gender
identity. There are always several questions on every version of the
886
examination which include very unique and specific knowledge. While
this term may be unfamiliar, it is possible to use reasoning to get to the
correct answer with some familiarity that most nouns (not all) are
assigned a gender—masculine or feminine—in the Spanish language.
The endings of words often indicate whether they are masculine or
feminine. As “Latinx” does not end in the traditional “a” or “o” for this
word, it may be possible to reason that the substitution concerns the
assignment of gender.
When a question asks about a term that is unknown, it is best to use
any information or reasoning available and select the response choice
which appears logical (even if it is just a guess). Failing the exam will
not occur just because there are a handful of unfamiliar terms or
concepts.
Question Assesses
Human Development, Diversity, and Behavior in the Environment
68. A. Termination is an important part of the problem-solving process as
there is a beginning, middle, and end to all clinical relationships. Most
social work focuses on engaging clients in services, followed by helping
them obtain stability. Too often, references to the inevitable end of
client–social worker relationships are absent during all steps in the
treatment process. Yet, clinical relationships have an end point. Some
have clearly defined time limits, while others use assessment of clinical
outcomes to determine when clients are ready for discharge. Even long-
term programs serving chronic populations such as those with mental
illness, persons with developmental disabilities, or persons with chronic
medical conditions still experience staff turnover requiring termination
issues to be broached.
The final stages of treatment with clients can be met with a range of
emotion from jubilation to deep sorrow. Nevertheless, if work has been
done during the initial and maintenance phases of treatment, transition
and termination discussion should not be a surprise and should actually
be expected.
During termination, greater independence should be encouraged. As it
is important that clients not feel cast aside or abandoned, in-depth
conversation about clients’ reactions to the end of their clinical
relationships should take place in order to let them voice their fears. In
887
addition, progress should be reviewed and appropriate actions if
problems reappear should be identified.
In the scenario, the social worker is in the last step in the problem-
solving process, termination. However, new information about the
client’s situation has been revealed. This information appears to be
directly related to the problem which originally brought her into
treatment. While her anxiety has improved in recent months, a change
in her environment, such as going to a new school, may serve as a
stressor. Thus, termination may be premature as the client could require
additional support. Assessment is an ongoing activity which can take
place during any step in the problem-solving process. Thus, the social
worker should determine whether termination is still appropriate through
a thorough assessment.
Acknowledging progress made during treatment and identifying needed
follow-up services are standard activities which occur during
termination. However, they are incorrect response choices as they do
not consider the new information about the client’s situation.
Question Assesses
Psychotherapy, Clinical Interventions, and Case Management
69. B. The Health Insurance Portability and Accessibility Act of 1996
Medical Privacy Regulations (known as the HIPAA Privacy Rule) has
important implications for the confidentiality of psychotherapy notes. The
HIPAA Privacy Rule recognizes the unique characteristics of
“psychotherapy notes” and defines them as notes that are:
■ Recorded (in any medium) by a mental health professional documentin
analyzing the contents of conversation during a private counseling ses
or a group, joint, or family counseling session; and
■ Separated from the rest of the individual’s medical or clinical record.
Thus, any additional privacy protection that may be available to clients’
psychotherapy notes depends on whether the notes are maintained
separately from the rest of the clinical file. This has been interpreted to
mean in a separate file (paper or electronic), rather than a subsection of
a file. The underlying rationale is that the notes are intended primarily
for use by social workers. Access to the notes should be limited to
primary clinicians.
888
Under the Privacy Rule, the definition of “psychotherapy notes” does not
include session start and stop times, modalities and frequency of
treatment, medication monitoring, clinical tests, or summaries of
diagnosis, prognosis, treatment plan, or progress.
If a social work practice decides to maintain separate psychotherapy
notes, all the previously listed excluded material would be maintained in
the primary client file or “medical record,” while the psychotherapy notes
would be kept elsewhere. Thus, the primary client chart would include,
as applicable:
■ Medication prescription and monitoring
■ Counseling sessions’ start and stop times
■ Modalities and frequencies of treatment furnished
■ Results of clinical tests
■ Any summary of diagnosis, functional status, treatment plan, sympto
prognosis, and progress to date
■ Intake information
■ Billing information
■ Formal evaluations
■ Notes of collateral contacts
■ Records obtained from other providers
The previous information would be considered the “medical record” for
HIPAA purposes and subject to disclosure with a general consent or
authorization to release information. Under the Privacy Rule, for
separately maintained psychotherapy notes to be released, the client
should sign a separate authorization form. This means clients will be
more aware as to when such a specific request has been made, and
clinicians can provide clients an opportunity to consider whether or not
they wish to sign a separate authorization for release of psychotherapy
notes. Thus, if a clinician receives a request for “all records” or the
“complete medical record,” along with a signed authorization, this is not
sufficient to release separately maintained psychotherapy notes. A
separate signed authorization, specific to the psychotherapy notes, is
required. This provides additional protection from routine disclosure of
the notes to third parties, such as insurers.
889
This is a recall question which relies on social workers understanding
confidentiality standards concerning psychotherapy notes. Storing them
in a section of a client’s file does not afford them “the greatest
confidentiality protections” under HIPAA. Agency policy will also not
provide additional protections if separate files are not maintained for
psychotherapy notes.
Question Assesses
Professional Values and Ethics
70. A. Cannabis-related disorders are a group of mental health conditions
that stem from the use of THC-containing marijuana or hashish. The
American Psychiatric Association (APA) classifies these conditions as
specific examples of a more comprehensive category of problems called
substance-related disorders.
The DSM contains definitions for four cannabis-related disorders:
cannabis intoxication, cannabis use disorder, cannabis withdrawal, and
other cannabis-induced disorders.
People affected by cannabis intoxication have typically smoked or
ingested marijuana or hashish within roughly 2 hours of the onset of
their symptoms. Specific symptoms that indicate the presence of
intoxication include a significant spike in the normal heart rate, mouth
dryness, appetite elevation, and unusual fluid accumulation in the
eyelids (a condition known as conjunctival injection). In addition to at
least two of these cannabis-related alterations, all diagnosed clients
must experience substantial psychological or behavioral impairments as
a result of marijuana or hashish use. They must also lack other
conditions that provide a more reasonable basis for their
mental/physical state.
Some people who withdraw from cannabis meet the mental health
criteria for substance withdrawal. Cannabis use disorder is the
continued use of cannabis despite significant negative impact on a
client’s life and health. Social workers can also use cannabis withdrawal
to identify these people if they meet the following criteria.
■ Cessation of cannabis use that has been heavy and prolonged
usually daily or almost daily use over a period of at least a few months)
■ Three or more of the following signs and symptoms develop w
approximately 1 week after cessation of heavy, prolonged use:
890
• Irritability, anger, or aggression
• Nervousness or anxiety
• Sleep difficulty (insomnia, disturbing dreams)
• Decreased appetite or weight loss
• Restlessness
• Depressed mood
• At least one of the following physical symptoms causing sign
discomfort: abdominal pain, shakiness/tremors, sweating, fever, ch
headache
■ The signs or symptoms cause clinically significant distress or impairm
in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
■ The signs or symptoms are not attributable to another medical cond
and are not better explained by another mental disorder, inclu
intoxication or withdrawal from another substance.
Cannabis is known for its ability to produce symptoms in some users
that strongly resemble the symptoms of certain diagnosable mental
conditions. Other cannabis-induced disorders provide social workers
with the freedom to specify exactly which issues they uncover in their
cannabis-using clients.
This is a recall question which relies on social workers knowing the
signs of substance withdrawal and whether the withdrawal meets the
diagnostic criteria for a mental health concern because they significantly
degrade participation in a functional routine or trigger a troublesome
state of mind.
Withdrawal of cannabis often produces decreased appetite or weight
loss—not hunger. Hallucinations are not a sign of withdrawal but may
be an indication of other cannabis-induced disorder when associated
with use. Depressed mood is the only withdrawal symptom listed that
appears in the DSM as one of three or more that must be present within
a week of stopping cannabis to be diagnosed with cannabis withdrawal.
Question Assesses
Assessment, Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning
71.
891
A. The neurodevelopmental disorders are a group of conditions with
onset often before the child enters grade school and are characterized
by developmental deficits that produce impairments of personal, social,
academic, or occupational functioning. Diagnosing them involves
understanding strong knowledge of child development and its
milestones.
The range of developmental deficits varies from very specific limitations
of learning or control of executive functions to global impairments of
social skills or intelligence. The neurodevelopmental disorders
frequently co-occur, with individuals with autism spectrum disorder often
having intellectual developmental disorder, and many children with
attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder also having a specific learning
disorder. For some disorders, the clinical presentation includes
symptoms of excess as well as deficits and delays in achieving
expected milestones.
The correct answer must be one that is needed “to effectively work with
this child.” The child has a neurodevelopmental disorder characterized
by deficits in typical functioning. As the social worker is charged with
developing learning opportunities to address these delays, it is essential
that these activities be developmentally appropriate and targeted at
areas needing growth.
There is a need to pick out the most salient or relevant answer. School
policy may be useful when developing an intervention plan, but policy
does not directly speak to the child’s area of need or delay. Past
academic performance will not be needed to effectively work with the
child as the performance is likely poor, hence the reason for the current
referral.
Question Assesses
Assessment, Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning
72. A. A genogram is structurally similar to a family tree but serves a very
different purpose. A genogram includes information about relationships
and interactions between family members, while a family tree only
depicts lineage. Genograms use a combination of special rules and
symbols to depict a lot of information about families as succinctly as
possible. Some rules and practices have been standardized and should
be followed so future readers can understand the documentation. Other
892
rules and symbols used in genograms differ depending on the source or
setting.
Emotional relationships are depicted with a line directly connecting two
people on a genogram. Typically, dotted or dashed lines indicate
distance which can be due to a variety of factors such as separation,
mental illness, abuse, or infidelity. Social workers need to be familiar
with genograms and other assessment measures used in social work
practice.
Question Assesses
Assessment, Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning
73. A. Social workers respect and promote the right of clients to self-
determination and assist clients in their efforts to identify and clarify their
goals. Social workers may only limit clients’ right to self-determination
when, in the social workers’ professional judgment, clients’ actions or
potential actions pose a serious, foreseeable, and imminent risk to
themselves or others. Limitation should not be made when social
workers feel that clients are simply making poor choices or the actions
could have negative ramifications for their well-being, but these
consequences are not serious, foreseeable, and imminent.
The question contains a qualifying word—FIRST. There may be more
than one appropriate action by the social worker, but each must be
done after recognition that this decision is ultimately to be made by the
client. Despite the social worker’s belief that the decision is a poor one,
the client should not be judged and instead should be supported
throughout the process.
The decision by the client to leave her employment does not meet the
threshold of causing serious, foreseeable, and imminent harm. The
social worker may assess whether changes in the client’s life have
influenced this decision and help the client to understand the
consequences of her decision. However, these actions should occur
after the right of the client to make such a choice is acknowledged.
Question Assesses
Professional Values and Ethics
74. C. The effects of substance abuse and/or dependence can be
893
detrimental to client functioning. Wernicke’s encephalopathy and
Korsakoff syndrome are different conditions that often occur together.
Both are due to brain damage caused by a lack of vitamin B1. Korsakoff
syndrome is most commonly caused by alcohol misuse but can also be
associated with certain other conditions. Korsakoff syndrome is often,
but not always, preceded by an episode of Wernicke’s encephalopathy,
which is an acute brain reaction to severe lack of thiamine. Wernicke’s
encephalopathy is a medical emergency that causes confusion,
staggering and stumbling, lack of coordination, and abnormal involuntary
eye movements. Symptoms of Korsakoff syndrome include inability to
form new memories, loss of memory, making up stories (confabulation),
and seeing or hearing things that are not really there (hallucinations).
Confabulation is defined as the spontaneous production of false
memories: either memories for events which never occurred, or
memories of actual events which are displaced in space or time. These
memories may be elaborate and detailed. The exact causes of
confabulation are unknown, but basal forebrain damage may lead to
memory impairments, while frontal damage may lead to problems in
self-awareness. Thus, a client may have a memory deficit, but be
unaware of this deficit.
Confabulators are not lying. They are not deliberately trying to mislead.
In fact, clients are generally quite unaware that their memories are
inaccurate, and they may argue strenuously that they have been telling
the truth.
The correct answer must be the name of a disorder which is
characterized by telling stories based on false memories due to brain
damage. Reaction formation is a defense mechanism in which emotions
and impulses which are anxiety-producing or perceived to be
unacceptable are mastered by exaggeration of the directly opposing
tendency. Confabulation should not be confused with false memory
syndrome, the phenomenon whereby otherwise typical clients suddenly
“remember” repressed incidents of childhood abuse or other trauma.
Confabulation is a clinical syndrome resulting from injury to the brain,
whereas false memory syndrome is not.
Question Assesses
Human Development, Diversity, and Behavior in the Environment
75. A. Many ethical issues in social work—although certainly not all—
894
require some legal knowledge. In addition, the NASW Code of Ethics
requires social workers to consult laws that are relevant to ethical
decisions. In the United States, three branches of government create
laws: legislative, executive, and judicial.
Statutory law is enacted by Congress (federal) and legislatures (state).
Statutes govern social workers’ obligation to report suspected abuse
and neglect of children, elders, and other vulnerable people; minors’
right to consent to mental health counseling and to drug and alcohol
abuse treatment; protection of school social workers’ confidential
records; and federal Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act
of 1996 (HIPAA) laws.
Regulatory law is promulgated by federal and state government
agencies, such as the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
and state human service, child welfare, and mental health agencies.
Under our system of law, federal and state agencies have the authority
to establish enforceable regulations. Public agencies must follow strict
procedures when they create regulations (e.g., providing public notice
and opportunity for public comment about drafts of regulations). Once
enacted, federal and state regulations have the force of law.
Case law is created in the context of litigation and judicial rulings. For
example, a judge may need to interpret the meaning or application of
existing law, resolve conflicts between laws, or fill gaps in existing laws.
Such rulings by appellate courts become legal precedent or case law.
Constitutional law is dictated by the Constitution and includes numerous
provisions that pertain to social work practice. Examples concern Fourth
Amendment guidelines concerning citizens’ right to privacy and
protections against improper search and seizure (important in
residential treatment programs) and Eighth Amendment protections
against cruel and unusual punishment (important in juvenile and adult
correctional facilities).
This question requires social workers to be familiar with a landmark
California court case related to duty to warn. Current guidelines
concerning social workers’ duty to disclose confidential information
without client consent to protect third parties from harm were initially
established by Tarasoff v. Board of Regents of the University of
California. In 1976, the California Supreme Court ruled that mental
health clinicians have a duty to protect potential victims if their clients
make threats or otherwise behaved as if they presented a “serious
895
danger of violence to another.” In its ruling, the court determined that
the need for mental health clinicians to protect the public was more
important than protecting client confidentiality.
Question Assesses
Professional Values and Ethics
76. C. Social workers should be mindful of value differences which often
arise with clients. Social workers’ own values and beliefs can greatly
influence social worker–client relationships. Culture, race, and ethnicity
are strongly linked to values. A social worker’s self-awareness about
personal attitudes, values, and beliefs and a willingness to acknowledge
value differences are critical factors in working with clients. A social
worker is responsible for bringing up and addressing issues of cultural or
other differences with clients.
Social workers should value and celebrate differences of others rather
than ignoring or minimizing them. Social workers should have an
awareness of personal values and biases and how they may influence
relationships with clients. They should also understand their own
personal and professional limitations, as well as acknowledge their own
stereotypes and prejudices.
All the response choices are plausible, but the correct one is most
appropriate and relevant in this situation. Even though a qualifying word
is not used, it is necessary to select the best action when value conflicts
with clients arise. Referring clients to other practitioners implies that
such conflicts cannot be successfully managed. It is common for social
workers to have different beliefs and attitudes than their clients. Clients
should not be penalized by having to reengage with other providers
simply because their views differ. It is the responsibility of social workers
to acknowledge and manage these conflicts.
Social workers should always respect clients’ rights to self-
determination. Self-determination concerns clients’ rights to make
decisions and take actions in their lives. Respecting clients’ rights to
self-determination should always occur, not just when there is a value
conflict. Value conflicts should be acknowledged and examined so that
they do not interfere with the therapeutic alliance and helping process.
Question Assesses
896
Professional Values and Ethics
77. B. The impacts of mental illness on family dynamics can be devastating.
Impaired awareness of illness (anosognosia) is the MOST prevalent
problem because it is the single largest reason individuals with
schizophrenia and bipolar disorder do not take their medications. It is
caused by damage to specific parts of the brain, especially the right
hemisphere. It affects about half of individuals with schizophrenia and
about 40% of individuals with bipolar disorder. Impaired awareness of
illness is a relative, not an absolute, problem. Some may also fluctuate
in their awareness, being more aware at times and less at others. When
taking medications, awareness of illness can improve for some.
It is difficult to understand how a person who is ill would not know it.
Impaired awareness of illness is very difficult for family members to
comprehend. Psychiatric symptoms seem so obvious that it is hard to
believe that those exhibiting them are not aware. The term comes from
the Greek word for disease (nosos) and knowledge (gnosis). It literally
means “to not know a disease.”
Social workers need to understand the complex nature of mental illness,
especially on members of families. While side effects of antipsychotics
for the treatment of schizophrenia can be both dangerous and
annoying, a person would have to have taken medication to be
bothered by its effects. Also, side effects associated with a particular
medication can be overcome by using a different antipsychotic drug
instead.
Anosognosia differs from denial. Often those with schizophrenia who
refuse medication do not see themselves as ill as they do not recognize
their symptoms (anosognosia); rather, they are using a strategy to
minimize the signs of their illness as they do not want to address it
(denial).
Question Assesses
Assessment, Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning
78. C. Intersectionality is the intersecting systems of privilege and
oppression. Privilege is when people do not have to face an
institutionalized form of oppression, and oppression is when they do
have to face it. Just because people have one form of privilege do not
mean they have all forms.
897
People can be oppressed and privileged in many different ways, such
as due to their genders, sexual orientations, races, and so on. While a
straight, white cisgender man has privilege, he may have a lower
socioeconomic status and be oppressed due to his economic status. He
also may have a physical or mental disability which results in
oppression. This is an example of intersectionality.
Race, gender, gender expression, sexual orientation, socioeconomic
status, physical and mental ability, religion, language, age, physical
attractiveness, occupation, and education are just some of the
categories of intersectionality.
Social workers should be aware of privilege and oppression, which are
shaped by racism, homophobia, ableism, and other institutionalized
discrimination. This recall question requires knowledge that inequities
are never the result of single, distinct factors. Rather, they are the
outcome of intersections of different social locations, power relations,
and experiences. While some of the incorrect response choices are true
or contain important points, they are not the BEST (which is a qualifying
word) definitions of intersectionality, which is the criteria used to select
the correct answer.
Question Assesses
Human Development, Diversity, and Behavior in the Environment
79. C. Dissociation is a mental process that severs connections among a
person’s thoughts, memories, feelings, actions, and/or sense of identity.
Dissociation—losing the ability to recall or track a particular action (e.g.,
arriving at work but not remembering the last minutes of the drive)—is
common and happens because the person is engaged in an automatic
activity and is not paying attention to the immediate environment.
However, dissociation can also be an impact of trauma as it serves as a
protective element whereby the victim incurs distortion of time, space, or
identity.
Dissociation helps distance the experience from the individual. People
who have experienced severe or developmental trauma may have
learned to separate themselves from distress to survive. At times,
dissociation can be very pervasive and symptomatic of a mental
disorder, such as dissociative identity disorder (DID; formerly known as
multiple personality disorder). Diagnoses of dissociative disorders are
closely associated with histories of severe childhood trauma.
898
There are many signs of dissociation including fixed or “glazed” eyes,
sudden flattening of affect, long periods of silence, monotonous voice,
stereotyped or repetitive movements, responses not congruent with
situations, and/or excessive intellectualization.
Excessive guilt is another response to trauma. It attempts to make
sense cognitively and gain control over a traumatic experience by
assuming responsibility.
Intrusive thoughts and memories can also occur as a result of trauma.
Experiencing, without warning or desire, thoughts and memories
associated with the trauma can easily trigger strong emotional and
behavioral reactions, as if the trauma was recurring in the present. The
intrusive thoughts and memories can come rapidly, referred to as
flooding, and can be disruptive at the time of their occurrence.
Depression can also result from guilty feelings associated with the
trauma. Survivors often believe that others will not fully understand their
experiences, leading to isolation and depression.
In the scenario, there are many responses to trauma—substance use,
aggression (perhaps tied to underlying anger), and memory gaps.
However, no indicators of guilt or depression, such as crying, self-
blaming, and lethargy, are mentioned. In addition, the scenario does not
describe the presence of intrusive thoughts, such as flashbacks. It is
likely that the client would exhibit strong emotional or behavioral
reactions to such memories. Instead, the client is unemotional, denying
the impact of the abuse. This reaction is typical of dissociation.
Question Assesses
Human Development, Diversity, and Behavior in the Environment
80. B. Schizoid personality disorder is characterized by eccentricity; clients
with this disorder often appear odd or peculiar. They tend to be distant,
detached, and indifferent to social relationships. They generally are
loners who prefer solitary activities and rarely express strong emotion.
Many people with schizoid personality disorder are able to function fairly
well, although they tend to choose jobs that allow them to work alone,
such as night security officers, library workers, or lab workers.
Clients with schizoid personality disorder often are reclusive, organizing
their lives to avoid contact with other people. Many never marry or may
899
continue to live with their parents as adults. Other common traits of
people with this disorder include:
■ No desire or enjoyment in close relationships, even with family membe
■ Choice of solitary jobs and activities
■ Pleasure in few activities, including sex
■ Difficulty relating to others
■ Indifferent to praise or criticism
■ Aloof with little emotion
■ Daydreaming and/or creating vivid fantasies of complex inner lives
The question asks about atypical behaviors, meaning those that are not
commonly associated with the disorder. The correct answer must list
behavior that is unlikely given the defining characteristics of this
disorder. Clients with schizoid personality disorder do not enjoy
relationships and have no close friends. They desire solitude. Thus,
clients would avoid sexual activities and social events.
As clients with schizoid personality disorder rarely express emotion, it
would be unlikely that they would express anger when criticized.
Question Assesses
Assessment, Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning
81. A. There are several contraindications to family-centered social work
practice. These include, but are not limited to, when:
■ There is an unstable member or members and the risk of stimula
intense affect in a session might lead to decompensation or other adv
effects.
■ There is violence in the family (elder abuse, domestic violence, and c
abuse).
■ Family members are physically or emotionally destructive toward
another.
■ Essential members of the family cannot or refuse to be included.
■ Detoxification of a family member or the stabilization of a family mem
with psychosis is the goal.
900
■ There is not a commitment to address issues by all family members or
member is being deceptive (e.g., one partner has not disclosed a pla
leave the relationship).
This question is focused on choosing appropriate treatment modalities
for client problems. Family-centered social work practice recognizes
that people do not exist in a vacuum, and it is important, at times, to
look at families as a whole, not just their members.
Two of the response choices are contraindications of family therapy,
making them incorrect. Only the correct answer illustrates a reason to
treat a family as a whole.
Boundaries occur at every level of a system. They influence the flow of
information into and within a system. Using family systems theory,
social workers can assist with establishing healthy structures in
situations where they do not exist or are continually violated.
Question Assesses
Assessment, Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning
82. C. The DSM has a cluster of disorders that involve obsessional thoughts
and/or compulsive behaviors. These include obsessive-compulsive
disorder (OCD), body dysmorphic disorder (BDD), hoarding disorder,
trichotillomania (hair-pulling disorder), and excoriation (skin-picking)
disorder.
Motor tics are often comorbid in clients with OCD. Both OCD and tic
disorders are best treated with medication and behavior modification.
Matching interventions to client problems is paramount.
One behavioral technique, habit reversal training, is extremely effective
in reducing tics. Habit reversal training has four main components:
awareness training, development of a competing response, building
motivation, and generalization of skills. Awareness training is used to
bring greater attention to tics and other behaviors so that a client can
gain better self-control. Awareness training usually involves describing
in detail each time the behavior occurs and identifying the earliest
warning that a tic or impulsive behavior is about to take place. These
warning signs can be urges, sensations, or thoughts. Once a client has
developed a good awareness of a tic or impulsive behavior, the next
step is to develop a competing response that replaces the old tic or
901
impulsive behavior. Usually, the competing response is opposite to that
of the tic or impulsive behavior and is something that can be carried out
for longer than just a couple of minutes. Choosing a response that will
be more or less unnoticeable by others is best. To keep the tics and
impulsive behaviors from coming back, a client is encouraged to make a
list of all the problems that were caused by the behavior. The last step is
to encourage new skills in a range of different contexts, not just those
that clients mastered to date.
The treatment of OCD has also been well established in the roots of
behavior therapy. Exposing clients to the feared stimuli and blocking the
conditioned response helps reduce both the onset and severity of
symptoms.
Solution-focused brief therapy (SFBT) places focus on a client’s present
and future circumstances and goals rather than past experiences. In
this goal-oriented therapy, the symptoms or issues bringing a client to
therapy are typically not targeted.
Psychoanalytic psychotherapy is a form of clinical practice which is
based on psychoanalytic theory and principles and focuses on
increasing self-understanding and deepening insight into emotional
issues and conflicts which underlie the presenting difficulties. Treatment
includes exploring unconscious thoughts and feelings and
understanding aspects of the relationship between a social worker and
client, which may relate to underlying emotional conflicts, interpretation
of defensive processes which obstruct emotional awareness, and
consideration of issues related to sense of self.
Social workers should be aware of interventions which have empirically
been found to be effective with client problems or diagnoses. This is a
recall question, testing knowledge of therapeutic models. In order to
answer correctly, familiarity with the approaches listed as response
choices is needed. In the scenario, the client would like to reduce the
compulsive behavior which results from his obsessive thoughts.
Existential and psychodynamic psychotherapy are based on the belief
that client problems are caused by conditions or conflicts in human life.
OCD and tic disorder are neuropsychiatric, making these two
approaches incorrect.
SFBT is based on the belief that problems do not happen all the time
and studying the times when problems are less severe or absent can
assist clients to see what life will be like when the goal is accomplished,
902
and the problem is gone. It requires clients to take control of their
situation and focuses on developing greater awareness and repeating
the successful things they do when the problem is less severe. OCD
and tic disorders are pervasive, with behaviors seen as uncontrollable
to clients. Behavior management, as opposed to insight-oriented or brief
therapy, is much more effective.
Question Assesses
Assessment, Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning
83. B. Prevention includes a wide range of activities—known as
“interventions”—aimed at reducing risks or threats. Primary, secondary,
and tertiary prevention are three terms that describe the range of
possibilities.
Primary prevention aims to prevent disease or injury before it ever
occurs. This is done by preventing exposures to hazards that cause
disease or injury, altering unhealthy or unsafe behaviors that can lead to
disease or injury, and increasing resistance to disease or injury should
exposure occur.
Secondary prevention aims to reduce the impact of a disease or injury
that has already occurred. This is done by detecting and treating
disease or injury as soon as possible to halt or slow its progress,
encouraging personal strategies to prevent reinjury or recurrence, and
implementing programs to return clients to their original health and
function to prevent long-term problems.
Tertiary prevention aims to soften the impact of an ongoing illness or
injury that has lasting effects. This is done by helping clients manage
long-term, often-complex health problems and injuries (e.g., chronic
diseases, permanent impairments) to improve as much as possible their
ability to function, their quality of life, and their life expectancy.
The question contains a qualifying word—BEST. In the scenario, the
client “is very worried about ensuring that the drug administration does
not adversely affect her current routine.” Her concern is the presenting
problem, and the social worker can assist the client to better understand
what will be required by ensuring that she receives accurate and
complete information about what is required. Psychoeducation is often
used to help clients learn how to slow the progression of a disease or
903
limit its long-term impacts through diet, medication, or exercise. She
needs a tertiary prevention intervention.
The client may be worrying unnecessarily. Thus, providing information is
the most effective strategy for determining whether there will be any
impact to her current daily routine.
There is nothing in the scenario that indicates that the client needs help
navigating multiple service delivery systems, thereby making the
provision of case management futile at this point. Psychotherapy aims
to facilitate change and confront barriers that interfere with emotional
and mental well-being. Support may be needed to assist the client while
she understands changes in her medication regimen, but there is no
indication that she needs psychotherapy due to her most pressing
concern.
Question Assesses
Psychotherapy, Clinical Interventions, and Case Management
84. B. Social workers often serve as consultants for problems related to
clients, services, organizations, and/or policies. Consultation is the
utilization of an “expert” in a specific area to assist with developing a
solution to the issue. Consultation is usually time limited, and the advice
of consultants can be used or not used by those who have formal
decision-making power. Although consultants do not have formal
authority within agencies, they have informal authority as “experts”
based upon their expertise and skill. Formal authority comes from one’s
official position with agencies, with those at the top of organizational
structures having more formal authority than those at the bottom.
As the social worker in the scenario is a consultant, the source of
authority comes from professional expertise. This knowledge base
evolves from both education and experience in the field. The incorrect
response choices are not sources of authority based on the social
worker’s role. The social worker is not an employee of the agency. A
consultant has no official position within an organizational structure.
Thus, consultants usually do not appear on organizational charts or are
depicted with dotted lines to show that they are advisory and not within
the hierarchical structures.
Question Assesses
904
Psychotherapy, Clinical Interventions, and Case Management
85. C. Separation anxiety is normal in very young children (those between 8
and 14 months old). When this fear occurs in a child over age 6 years, is
excessive, and lasts longer than 4 weeks, the child may have separation
anxiety disorder.
Separation anxiety disorder is a condition in which a child becomes
fearful and nervous when away from home or separated from a parent
or other caregiver. Some children also develop physical symptoms,
such as headaches or stomachaches, at the thought of being
separated. The fear of separation causes great distress to the child and
may interfere with the child’s normal activities, such as going to school
or playing with other children.
Most mild cases of separation anxiety disorder do not need medical
treatment. In more severe cases, or when the child refuses to go to
school, treatment may be needed. The goals of treatment include
reducing anxiety in the child and developing a sense of security in the
child and the caregivers. Treatment options include psychotherapy to
help the child tolerate being separated from the caregiver without the
separation causing distress or interfering with function. A type of
therapy called cognitive behavioral therapy works to reshape the child’s
thinking (cognition) so that the child’s behavior becomes more
appropriate. Family therapy also may help teach the family about the
disorder and help family members better support the child during
periods of anxiety. Antidepressant or other antianxiety medications may
be used to treat severe cases of separation anxiety disorder.
There is no known way to prevent separation anxiety disorder, but
recognizing and acting on symptoms when they appear can minimize
distress and prevent problems associated with not going to school. In
addition, reinforcing a child’s independence and self-esteem through
support and approval may help prevent future episodes of anxiety.
The root cause of the problems experienced by the mother is her
daughter’s separation anxiety. Thus, appropriate intervention should
focus on assisting the child to return to normal developmental
functioning. A child with separation anxiety needs to be able to tolerate
normal separation from caregivers without distress or impairment of
functioning. A child with concomitant school refusal should return to
school as quickly as possible. As the mother is the client, intervention
905
should focus on helping her deal with the child’s symptoms while
seeking treatment for the daughter.
Suggesting that the woman tell her employer about her situation will not
help to address the underlying problem. Job performance will continue
to be impacted until the child’s anxiety is managed. It is helpful for the
woman not to feel isolated and understand that her emotional reaction
is typical. However, this acknowledgment will also not address the
problem.
The question uses a qualifying word—MOST—to highlight that some of
the response choices may be helpful to the client, but the correct
answer is the one focused on addressing the presenting problem.
Question Assesses
Assessment, Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning
86. C. Child development literature draws attention to the importance of
peer relationships in social development, especially in adolescence,
when peers may facilitate each other’s antisocial behavior. It has often
been assumed that peers are less important in early childhood when
relationships with family members are more influential. However,
research shows clearly that even infants spend time with peers, and that
some 3- and 4-year-olds are already having trouble being accepted by
their peers.
Most infants and toddlers meet peers on a regular basis, and some
experience long-lasting relationships with peers that start at birth. By 6
months of age, infants can communicate with other infants by smiling,
touching, and babbling. In the second year of life, they show both
prosocial and aggressive behavior with peers, with some toddlers
clearly being more aggressive than others.
Although many investigators have described early peer relations,
relatively little attention has been paid to the emotional, cognitive, and
behavioral skills that underlie the ability to interact harmoniously with
peers. Early peer relations depend on the following skills that develop
during the first 2 years of life: (a) managing joint attention, (b) regulating
emotions, (c) inhibiting impulses, (d) imitating another’s actions, (e)
understanding cause-and-effect relationships, and (f) linguistic
competence.
906
Peer acceptance is affected by relationships at home with parents and
siblings, the parents’ own relationships, and families’ levels of social
support. However, peer acceptance is most directly affected by
children’s own behavior. Studies show that highly aggressive children
are not accepted by their peers, but this may depend on gender.
There are clear links between very early peer relations and those that
occur later in childhood. Peer acceptance in early childhood is a
predictor of later peer relations. Children who were without friends in
kindergarten were still having difficulties dealing with peers at the age of
10.
Thus, peers play important roles in children’s lives. In fact, experiences
in the first 2 or 3 years of life have implications for children’s acceptance
by their classmates in nursery school and the later school years.
Children who are competent with peers at an early age, and those who
show prosocial behavior, are particularly likely to be accepted by their
peers.
Mainstreaming means that schools put children with unique learning
needs into classrooms with peers who do not have special needs.
Students who are mainstreamed have higher self-esteem and develop
better social skills. Their peers without disabilities also become more
tolerant and accepting.
Understanding that the goal of mainstreaming is to increase peer
interactions with nondisabled peers will assist with selecting the correct
answer. Family support, parental interactions, and sibling relationships
are also not directly related to greater exposure with nondisabled peers
in school settings. The idea that interactions lead to peer friendships
which have positive effects is the most salient reason for inclusion of
those with unique learning needs into classrooms with other students
who are classified as disabled.
Question Assesses
Human Development, Diversity, and Behavior in the Environment
87. B. Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors and other second-generation
antidepressants have become common therapeutic options for the
management of depression. Although these medications are effective,
they frequently cause sexual adverse effects that can impact clients’
quality of life, thus ultimately leading to nonadherence in many cases.
907
Clients should be educated about these possible adverse effects.
Assessments of sexual functioning before the medication (baseline) and
during its administration (treatment) should occur to monitor for these
effects. Management strategies include watchful waiting, dosage
reduction, drug holidays, switching antidepressants, and use of add-on
medications.
The question contains a qualifying word—MOST—that requires social
workers to select the response choice which is likely the cause. When
MOST is used as a qualifying word, other appropriate and possible
response choices will be listed. It is necessary to consider all the
information provided and pick the probable cause of the sexual
dysfunction.
There is no indication of relationship problems between the client and
his wife in the scenario. While sexual dysfunction can occur due to
physical changes associated with age, his erectile dysfunction coincided
with his taking of antidepressant medication. Antidepressants are
known to cause sexual problems, so his issue is likely a side effect of
his medication.
Question Assesses
Assessment, Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning
88. B. Observation is probably the most common and the simplest method
of data collection. It does not require much technical knowledge.
Although scientific controlled observation requires some technical skill, it
is still often easier than other methods.
There are many advantages and disadvantages to observation. With
other data collection methods like interviewing and surveying,
information is provided by clients so there is no means to examine the
accuracy of the data supplied. But in observation, social workers can
directly check the accuracy by seeing it happening. Thus, data collected
through observation is often more reliable than that collected through
interviewing or surveying. Observation can also be useful in learning
about phenomena that occur for persons who are not capable of giving
verbal information about their behavior, feelings, and activities because
they cannot speak, such as infants. Observation is indispensable in
finding out information on infants who can neither understand questions
by social workers nor express themselves verbally.
908
However, some occurrences may not be open to observation. Personal
behaviors are usually done when others are not present. In addition,
much can occur when observers are not present. One is also not sure
that what is observed is the same as it appears to others. Two persons
may judge the same phenomena differently. Lastly, observation is a
time-intensive process, making it costly.
The question contains a qualifying word—MOST. While there is more
than one concern, the correct answer is most significant about “using
this approach.” Observations are costly, but the expense does not
appear to be prohibitive as the social worker is doing the data collection.
No additional costs are incurred.
Behavior frequency is being collected. As the behavior was modified
using operant conditioning, there is likely a well-defined behavior which
can be directly observed. There can be ethical issues in the choice of
any therapeutic technique. However, there is no indication that unethical
practices were used. There are many punishments which are not
aversive, such as time out. Also, the question is asking about “this
approach”—observation—not the behavioral strategy.
The scenario states that the behavior has a “high rate” or occurs
frequently. It is likely that many behaviors will be occurring when the
social worker is not present. The social worker will need to get
information on what is happening when the client is alone or not with the
social worker as the client may be acting differently in these situations.
Self-monitoring or self-reports—not direct observation—can be helpful
in these instances.
Question Assesses
Assessment, Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning
89. C. Erik Erikson maintained that personality develops in a predetermined
order. He was interested in how children socialize and how this affects
their sense of self. He saw personality as developing throughout the life
course and looked at identity crises as the focal point for each stage of
human development.
According to Erikson, there are eight stages of psychosocial
development, with two possible outcomes. Successful completion of
each stage results in a healthy personality and successful interactions
with others. Failure to successfully complete a stage can result in a
909
reduced ability to complete further stages and, therefore, an unhealthier
personality and sense of self. These stages, however, can be resolved
successfully at a later time.
Industry versus inferiority occurs during childhood between the ages of
6 and 11 and is the fourth stage of psychosocial development. School
and social interaction play an important role during this time of a child’s
life. Through social interactions, children begin to develop a sense of
pride in their accomplishments and abilities. During the earlier stages, a
child’s interactions centered primarily on caregivers, family members,
and others in their immediate household. As the school years begin, the
realm of social influence increases dramatically. Friends and
classmates play a role in how children progress through the industry
versus inferiority stage.
At earlier stages of development, children were largely able to engage
in activities for fun and to receive praise and attention. Once school
begins, actual performance and skill are evaluated. Grades and
feedback from educators encourage kids to pay more attention to the
actual quality of their work.
During the industry versus inferiority stage, children become capable of
performing increasingly complex tasks. As a result, they strive to master
new skills. Children who are encouraged and commended by parents
and teachers develop a feeling of competence and belief in their skills.
Those who receive little or no encouragement from parents, teachers,
or peers will doubt their ability to be successful.
According to Erikson, this stage is vital in developing self-confidence.
During school and other social activities, children receive praise and
attention for performing various tasks such as reading, writing, drawing,
and solving problems. Kids who do well in school are more likely to
develop a sense of competence and confidence. They feel good about
themselves and their ability to succeed.
Children who struggle with schoolwork may have a harder time
developing these feelings of sureness. Instead, they may be left with
feelings of inadequacy and inferiority.
At this stage, it is important for both parents and teachers to offer
support and encouragement. However, adults should be careful not to
equate achievement with acceptance and love. Unconditional love and
support from adults can help all children through this stage, but
particularly those who may struggle with feelings of inferiority.
910
Children who are overpraised, on the other hand, might develop a
sense of arrogance. Balance plays a major role at this point in
development. Parents can help kids develop a sense of realistic
competence by avoiding excessive praise and rewards, encouraging
efforts, and helping kids develop a growth mindset. Even if children
struggle in some areas of school, encouraging kids in areas in which
they excel can help foster feelings of competence and achievement.
The question contains a qualifying word—MOST. In order to select the
correct answer, it is necessary to recall Erikson’s stages of psychosocial
development. The incorrect response choices reflect problems
associated with other psychosocial crises throughout the life course.
Trust versus mistrust occurs in the first year of life and is the first stage.
Initiative versus guilt begins at age 3 until age 6. In the scenario, the
boy is in third grade, making him too old for this stage and appropriate
for struggles associated with industry versus inferiority.
When age is included in a question, it is usually critical to selecting the
correct answer. In addition, even though Erikson is not explicitly
mentioned, the question asks about a “psychosocial problem.” Erikson
is a well-known theorist in this area and all the response choices are
associated with negative outcomes of his stages. Thus, his work should
be used to distinguish the correct answer from the incorrect response
choices. Often the names of theorists are not mentioned in questions.
However, reasoning using their work is essential to successfully
selecting the correct answers.
Question Assesses
Human Development, Diversity, and Behavior in the Environment
90. A. Informed consent is most often thought of in the context of the
contracting stage with a client, which comes at the beginning of the
professional relationship. To be effective, informed consent should be
seen as an ongoing process. Informed consent can be integrated into
each session with a client, or at regular/periodic intervals throughout a
professional relationship. As the goals of the relationship change,
informed consent should be revisited.
Informed consent is the process through which social workers discuss
with clients the nature of the social worker/client relationship. Through
informed consent, the social worker and client outline what the client
can expect from the professional relationship, as well as what the social
911
worker expects from the client’s participation. Informed consent often
includes a discussion of basic protocols, such as how to make or cancel
appointments or the best way to contact the social worker. The process
should also involve outlining what work will be done with and for the
client and what expectations there are for client involvement. Integral to
the informed consent process is a discussion of client confidentiality.
Using simple language, appropriate to the developmental and language
needs of the client, the social worker needs to explain to the client that
the social worker will generally keep information private, but there are
specific instances when the social worker is required to breach client
confidentiality. The social worker should highlight that if the social
worker suspects child maltreatment based on information received from
the client, the social worker will need to breach client confidentiality to
make a report of the suspicion to child protective services.
In some agencies or practice settings, informed consent involves the
client signing a form that acknowledges receipt of certain information.
Although a written tool is a good idea, it is important that there be
additional methods for ensuring informed consent. In all instances, with
or without written informed consent tools, the social worker and client
should discuss, face-to-face, expectations for confidentiality and when
confidentiality will be breached. The social worker should use language
the client can understand. As with other forms of communication with
clients, it is important to ensure that the client understands what is said
with regard to informed consent.
The qualifying word—BEST—indicates that more than one listed
response choice may be informative or useful, but the correct one is
that which most effectively “informs clients of the nature and
expectations of the social worker/client relationship.”
None of the incorrect response choices speak to exchanges between
social workers and clients about consent policies. Clients should have
the opportunity to ask questions and have policies explained in clear,
concise ways which are easy to understand. The correct answer
acknowledges that informed consent is an ongoing process and does
not just occur at intake.
Question Assesses
Professional Values and Ethics
91.
912
C. Object relations is a variation of psychoanalytic theory that diverges
from Sigmund Freud’s belief that humans are motivated by sexual and
aggressive drives, suggesting instead that humans are primarily
motivated by the need for contact with others—the need to form
relationships. The aim of a clinical social worker using object relations
theory is to help a client in therapy uncover early mental images that
may contribute to any present difficulties in relationships with others and
adjust them in ways that may improve interpersonal functioning. In the
context of object relations theory, the term “objects” refers not to
inanimate entities but to significant others with whom a client relates,
usually a mother, father, or primary caregiver. In some cases, an object
may also be used to refer to a part of a person, such as a mother’s
breast, or to the mental representations of significant others.
Object relations theorists stress the importance of early family
interactions, primarily the mother–infant relationship, in personality
development. It is believed that infants form mental representations of
themselves in relation to others and that these internal images
significantly influence interpersonal relationships later in life. Since
relationships are at the center of object relations theory, the client–
social worker alliance is important to the success of therapy.
Internal objects are formed during infancy through repeated
experiences with one’s caregiver. The images do not necessarily reflect
reality but are subjectively constructed by an infant’s limited cognitive
abilities. In healthy development, these mental representations evolve
over time; in unhealthy development, they remain at an immature level.
The internal images have enduring qualities and serve as templates for
future relationships.
Central to object relations theory is the notion of splitting, which can be
described as the mental separation of objects into “good” and “bad”
parts. This is a process of “psychic economy” whereby a complex
situation is simplified by separation rather than resolution.
Infants first experience splitting in their relationship with the primary
caregiver: The caregiver is “good” when all the infant’s needs are
satisfied and “bad” when they are not. Initially, these two aspects of the
object (the caregiver) are separated in the mind of the infant, and a
similar process occurs as the infant comes to perceive good and bad
parts of the self. If the mother can satisfactorily meet the needs of the
infant or—in the language of object relations—if the mother is “good
913
enough,” then the child begins to merge both aspects of the mother, and
by extension the self, into an integrated whole.
Isolation is a state of separation from others. Intimacy versus isolation is
one of Erikson’s psychosocial stages of development which occurs in
early adulthood.
Resistance is an attempt to prevent action or refuse to accept
something new. Clients often display resistance during the problem-
solving process as they are not ready to change or are fearful about
addressing long-standing issues in their lives.
This is a recall question which relies on social workers understanding
object relations theory. Questions on the examination may focus on
general underlying principles of theories, as well as key terms. It is not
necessary to memorize terms, but being able to identify them when they
are listed is essential. Often ones that look correct, just based on their
wording, are not. For example, in this question, “isolation” may seem to
fit as it implies separation. However, it is not the correct answer as
“splitting” is the formal name of this process. Thus, social workers
should know specific terms associated with all the major theories
studied.
Question Assesses
Psychotherapy, Clinical Interventions, and Case Management
92. C. When there is addiction in a family system, members typically adapt
to the person with the substance use problem by taking on roles that
help reduce stress, deal with uncertainty, and allow the family to
function. There is a problem with taking on these roles. While they tend
to reduce stress, they allow the member with the addiction to continue
the behavior. The following are roles that family members often take on
in these relationships.
The Enabler: The enabler is a family member who steps in and protects
the person who is addicted from the consequences of the addicted
behavior. The motivation for this may not be just to protect the person
who is addicted, but to prevent embarrassment, reduce anxiety, avoid
conflict, or maintain some control over a difficult situation. The enabler
may try to clean up the messes caused by the person who is addicted
and make excuses, thus minimizing the consequences of addiction.
914
The Mascot: The mascot attempts to use humor to escape from the
pain of the problems caused by addiction. The mascot will often act out
by “clowning around,” cracking jokes or making light of serious
situations. While the mascot can certainly help lighten up a desperate
situation, the real intent is to ease tension to keep the peace. Many
comedians come from dysfunctional homes.
The Scapegoat: The scapegoat is a family member who creates other
problems and concerns to deflect attention away from the real issue.
This can be through misbehavior, bad grades, or their own substance
abuse. Oftentimes, the scapegoat is very successful at distracting the
family and others from the addiction.
The Lost Child: The lost child is a family member who appears to be
ignoring the problem completely. There could be a fight, with yelling and
screaming, and the lost child will be absent or secluded from the
situation. The lost child is often perceived as the “good” child because
much time is spent alone with books or involved in isolated activities.
While the lost child will not be successful at drawing attention away from
the family problem, the lost child is able to avoid stress personally.
The Hero: The hero is a family member who attempts to draw attention
away from the person with the addiction by excelling, performing well,
and generally being “too good to be true.” The hero has a hope that
somehow the behavior will help the person who is addicted to stop
using. Additionally, the hero’s performance-based behavior helps to
block emotional pain and disappointment.
This is a recall question about “survival” roles in families with members
who have addictions. Families are organized around roles, rules, rituals,
boundaries, and hierarchies. Structure serves to promote their well-
being and the happiness of their members. But addiction in families
distorts their structure, and family members assume roles that naturally
do not belong to them. Members abandon their identities and needs and
become enmeshed in the lives of those who are addicted. Each of the
roles listed as response choices aims to release stress related to
addiction.
The hero, like the scapegoat, attempts to draw attention away from the
problem, with the former role doing so by excelling and the latter one
distracting through misbehavior. The hero is not a provided response
choice, so the scapegoat is the correct answer.
Question Assesses
915
Human Development, Diversity, and Behavior in the Environment
93. A. Disruptive mood dysregulation disorder (DMDD) is a childhood
condition of extreme irritability, anger, and frequent, intense temper
outbursts. DMDD symptoms go beyond being “moody” child—children
with DMDD experience severe impairment that requires clinical
attention. DMDD is characterized by severe and recurrent temper
outbursts that are grossly out of proportion in intensity or duration to the
situation. These occur, on average, three or more times each week for 1
year or more.
A child with DMDD experiences:
■ Irritable or angry mood most of the day, nearly every day
■ Severe temper outbursts (verbal or behavioral) at an average of thre
more times per week that are out of keeping with the situation and
child’s developmental level
■ Trouble functioning due to irritability in more than one place (e.g., ho
school, and with peers)
To be diagnosed with DMDD, a child must have these symptoms
steadily for 12 or more months.
Between outbursts, children with DMDD display a persistently irritable
or angry mood, most of the day and nearly every day, which is
observable by parents, teachers, or peers. A diagnosis requires the
previous symptoms to be present in at least two settings (at home, at
school, or with peers) for 12 or more months, and symptoms must be
severe in at least one of these settings. During this period, the child
must not have gone 3 or more consecutive months without symptoms.
The onset of symptoms must be before age 10, and a DMDD diagnosis
should not be made for the first time before age 6 or after age 18.
While the DSM does include two diagnoses with related symptoms to
DMDD, oppositional defiant disorder and bipolar disorder, the symptoms
described in DMDD are different than these two diagnoses.
Oppositional defiant disorder is an ongoing pattern of anger-guided
disobedience and hostilely defiant behavior toward authority figures that
goes beyond the bounds of normal childhood behavior. While the
symptoms may overlap with the criteria for DMDD, the symptom
threshold for DMDD is higher since the condition is considered more
916
severe. Thus, while most children who meet the criteria for DMDD will
also meet the criteria for oppositional defiant disorder, the reverse is not
the case. To avoid any artificial comorbidity of the two disorders, it is
recommended that children who meet the criteria for both should only
be diagnosed with DMDD.
Bipolar disorder also has similar symptoms. While a social worker may
have been assigning a diagnosis of bipolar disorder to these severely
irritable youth to ensure their access to treatment resources and
services, these children’s behaviors may not present in an episodic way
as is the case with bipolar disorder. In an effort to address this issue,
research was conducted comparing youth with severe nonepisodic
symptoms to those with the classic presentations of bipolar disorder.
Results of that extensive research showed that children diagnosed with
bipolar disorder who experience constant, rather than episodic,
irritability often are at risk for major depressive disorder or generalized
anxiety disorder later in life, but not lifelong bipolar disorder. This finding
pointed to the need for a new diagnosis for children suffering from
constant, debilitating irritability. The hope is that by defining this
condition more accurately, social workers will be able to improve
diagnosis and care.
This is a recall question which relies on social workers understanding
diagnoses in the DSM, as well as the justification for their creation.
Social workers should be able to differentially diagnose, choosing one
disorder over another based on the presence or severity of beliefs,
attitudes, and/or behaviors.
Question Assesses
Assessment, Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning
94. C. Children with disabilities should be educated in the least restrictive
environment (LRE) that is appropriate. The spirit of this requirement is to
ensure that children are not unnecessarily removed from the regular
classroom or isolated from other nondisabled children of their age. To
the maximum extent appropriate, children with disabilities, including
children in public or private institutions or other care facilities, should be
educated with children who are not disabled. Thus, special classes,
separate schooling, or other removal of children with disabilities from the
regular educational environment can only occur when the nature or
severity of the disability of a child is such that education in regular
917
classes with the use of supplementary aids and services cannot be
achieved satisfactorily.
Every student with a disability should be given the opportunity to start
out in a general education classroom; if that environment does not allow
for success and a more restrictive environment is deemed appropriate,
then good reason must be given as to why the LRE is not working. This
decision should be a main topic of discussion in educational planning
meetings. LRE decisions are made based on children’s learning needs
and vary from child to child. Schools should provide a full continuum of
services ranging from regular classrooms with support to special
classes and special school placements, as needed.
The scenario describes a situation where a school official has an
opinion contrary to the student’s legal right. The student’s needs “can
be adequately met in either the regular classroom with additional
supports or a separate resource room for students who require special
assistance.” The right to be served in the LRE should be the guiding
principle in making decisions about needed level of care.
The child’s preferences do not take precedent over the legal right to
obtain supports in the regular classroom, so meeting with the child is
not needed to resolve the presenting conflict. The guidance counselor’s
feelings also do not negate the rights of the child, as the child’s
academic needs can be met in the regular classroom with additional
supports. Suggesting ways to maintain friendships assumes that the
child will be receiving instruction in a resource room. Social workers
should advocate for client rights when they are threatened or violated by
others. Being knowledgeable about laws which must be followed when
assessing and deciding needed level of care is critical.
Question Assesses
Assessment, Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning
95. C. Binge eating disorder (BED) is defined as recurring episodes of
eating significantly more food in a short period of time than most people
would eat under similar circumstances, with episodes marked by
feelings of lack of control. A client with BED may eat too quickly, even
when the client is not hungry. The client may have feelings of guilt,
embarrassment, or disgust and may binge eat alone to hide the
behavior. This disorder is associated with marked distress and occurs,
on average, at least once a week over 3 months.
918
With this diagnosis and others, social workers should be able to
understand the differential use of therapeutic techniques, including
those which are evidence-based practices. Cognitive behavioral therapy
(CBT)—alone or in combination with medication—is effective in
reducing binge eating. It is unclear which medications provide the
greatest benefit in terms of binge eating remission; however, they do
facilitate short-term weight loss in clients who are overweight due to
BED. In addition to reducing binge eating, CBT can improve related
psychological comorbidities.
This is a recall question about different intervention techniques and their
appropriate usage. The incorrect response choices contain legitimate
social work treatments but are not best suited for the diagnosed
problem.
Psychoanalysis is a form of psychotherapy to treat clients who have a
range of mild to moderate chronic life problems. It is related to a specific
body of theories about the relationships between conscious and
unconscious mental processes. The purpose is to bring unconscious
mental material and processes into full consciousness so that clients
can gain more control over their lives.
Task-centered treatment involves working closely with clients to
establish distinct and achievable goals based on an agreed-upon
presenting problem(s). Clients and social workers collaborate on
devising tasks to work on those target problems which are memorialized
in contracts that contain the target problems, tasks to be implemented
by both clients and social workers to address the target problems, and
overall goals of the treatment. Task-centered treatment emphasizes
client preferences by asking clients what they most want to work on to
address their problems. This approach involves working briefly with
clients, typically for 8 to 12 sessions over the course of a 6-month
period.
Question Assesses
Assessment, Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning
96. A. Major neurocognitive disorder (formerly called dementia) and delirium
are prevalent mental disorders in those who are elderly. While major
neurocognitive disorder is prevalent in the community, hospitals, and
nursing homes, delirium is seen most often in acute care hospitals. It is
919
imperative that social workers be adept at recognizing, evaluating, and
managing clients with these syndromes.
The differential diagnosis hinges on a careful clinical evaluation. The
first step is to recognize which of the syndromes is present. Major
neurocognitive disorder is defined by a chronic loss of intellectual or
cognitive function of sufficient severity to interfere with social or
occupational function. Delirium is an acute disturbance of
consciousness marked by an attention deficit and a change in cognitive
function. It is important to recognize that these syndromes are not
mutually exclusive, as major neurocognitive disorder can coexist with
delirium and other disorders, such as major depressive disorder.
When a client presents with new cognitive complaints, the first
consideration is whether this condition represents major neurocognitive
disorder or delirium. Generally, a major difference between delirium and
major neurocognitive disorder is the rapidity of onset: progression of
symptoms is usually acute in delirium, rather than insidious and slowly
progressive as in major neurocognitive disorder. Additionally, delirium
may cause disturbance in the level of consciousness, attention, and
vital signs, whereas major neurocognitive disorder should not. The DSM
defines delirium as a disturbance from baseline in attention, awareness,
and cognition over a short period of time, with fluctuation in severity
throughout the day. These changes must not be explained by another
neurocognitive disorder, and there must be evidence that the condition
is not explained by another condition such as infection or substance
intoxication and withdrawal.
This is a recall question about the differences between delirium and
major neurocognitive disorder. Social workers should be able to make
differential diagnoses as many of the response choices related to the
competency of assessment and diagnosis have similar symptoms.
Picking among them will require knowing how disorders differ from one
another.
A significant difference that is used to diagnose delirium is the rapid
onset of symptoms. Major neurocognitive disorder causes a more
gradual progression of impairment. Alertness and orientation also
fluctuate and are variable throughout the day when a client has delirium.
In major neurocognitive disorder, a client may have issues with
alertness or orientation, but symptomology should be stable throughout
the day. The severity of the memory loss and the impact of the
920
symptoms are not the best methods “to differentiate” between these
diagnoses.
Question Assesses
Assessment, Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning
97. C. A functional behavior assessment is a comprehensive and
individualized strategy to identify the purpose or function of a client’s
problem behavior(s), develop and implement a plan to modify variables
that maintain the problem behavior, and teach appropriate replacement
behaviors using positive interventions. While there are a variety of
techniques available to conduct a functional behavioral assessment, the
first step in the process, regardless of technique, is to define the
behavior in concrete terms.
Before a functional behavioral plan can be implemented, it is necessary
to pinpoint the behavior causing problems and to define that behavior in
concrete terms that are easy to communicate and simple to measure
and record. Behavior should be in specific, observable, and measurable
terms. Simply stating that a client is aggressive is too vague. Instead,
for example, a social worker should specify that a client pokes, hits, and
kicks other students with her feet or hands during lunch period.
It may be necessary to carefully and objectively observe client behavior
in different settings and during different types of activities, and to
conduct interviews with others in order to pinpoint the specific
characteristics of a behavior. Once a problem behavior has been
defined concretely, it is possible to devise a strategy for determining the
functions of this behavior.
The question contains a qualifying word—FIRST. While there may be
more than one appropriate action by a social worker listed, the correct
answer is the initial step in conducting a functional behavioral
assessment. Determining why intervention is needed occur during
engagement with a client. Engagement occurs prior to assessment in
the problem-solving process. However, the question is asking about the
first action taken “when completing a functional behavioral
assessment”—not ever with a client. When doing a functional
behavioral assessment, a problem behavior is defined in measurable
terms; data is collected and analyzed; a hypothesis is formulated; and
an intervention plan is developed, implemented, and monitored,
respectively. Thus, the first action taken by a social worker is to define a
921
problem behavior in measurable terms. Identifying antecedents may be
important if an operant approach is being used, but this action would
occur after the behavior has been defined and data has been collected.
Question Assesses
Assessment, Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning
98. B. Shared power views clients as experts on their lives, cultures,
dreams, experiences, and goals. This perspective mandates that social
workers assume power only over the limited activities in which they are
trained while clients retain power to direct the work. Often shifting views
on expertise and interest in sharing power do not come easily. There is a
strong socialization to value expertise. Thus, social workers’ values and
contributions are seen through the lens of expertise. Social workers are
educated and socialized in professional programs to become respected
members of a profession. They are often pushed to adopt “expert” roles.
Additionally, some clients may want social workers to be experts on their
lives and relationships—just as they want doctors to dictate their medical
care. Adopting the “expert” role can obscure client ownership or
participation in the work.
Most social work services are delivered in agency settings. These
settings, which are traditionally operated with “top down” approaches,
place service recipients at the bottom of hierarchies with little say in
many decisions. Social workers should recognize that the only experts
on experiences are those who have lived them. Social workers honor
this wisdom by sharing power within therapeutic relationships. Systems
that rely on expertise can be humiliating, insulting, or patronizing and
inspire disillusionment in those served.
While objectivity is important in social work practice, it is not directly
related to shared power which views clients as experts in their lives.
Objectivity should not be used to justify beliefs that clients cannot solve
their own problems. The need for immediate assistance also should not
compromise the use of shared power. From the onset, social workers
should encourage a helping process based on mutual responsibility.
The delivery of services in agency contexts often threatens sharing
power with clients as protocols and regulations needed to operate can
require “rules” or protocols that do not respect the individual self-
determination of clients.
Question Assesses
922
Psychotherapy, Clinical Interventions, and Case Management
99. C. Behavior modification is the generic term given to any process
derived from learning theory where the goal is to change client behavior.
To understand behavior modification, it is necessary to understand the
two main concepts that it is based on: classical and operant
conditioning. Classical conditioning refers to the pairing of naturally
occurring stimulus-response chains with other stimuli to produce a
similar response. Operant conditioning is recognition that behaviors
have antecedents and consequences—and are increased or decreased
by reinforcement or punishment, respectively.
Biofeedback is the process of learning to voluntarily influence
physiological processes by making changes in cognition. It provides a
visible and experiential demonstration of the mind–body connection.
Biofeedback is also a therapeutic tool to facilitate learning self-
regulation of autonomic functions for improving health.
Modeling is learning by observing or imitating. There are different types
of modeling techniques to assist learners.
Shaping refers to the reinforcement of behaviors that approximate or
come close to desired new behaviors. The steps involved are often
called successive approximations because they successively
approximate or get closer and closer to desired behaviors. This
technique works well for phobias and anxiety-related disorders as the
process of shaping can involve the creation of a hierarchy ranging from
the least feared situation to the most feared situation. Rewards to
greater incremental exposure are provided as a means to confront
fears.
The question requires recall knowledge about behavioral techniques.
Shaping is used when it may be, or has been, difficult to achieve a goal
or demonstrate a behavior. Shaping allows the goal or behavior to be
achieved in steps, each reinforced positively. After a client achieves
each successive step of the behavior or goal, a reward is received and
the next one is presented until the desired end result is reached. If there
is difficulty in a client reaching the steps, they should be broken down
into smaller increments. While behaviors may be broken down when
they are modeled, there is no mention of the social worker
demonstrating them or the client observing or imitating the social worker
in the scenario presented.
923
Question Assesses
Human Development, Diversity, and Behavior in the Environment
100. C. The dynamics of loss, separation, and grief are different for all who
experience them. However, the needs of those who are grieving are
universal. Unlike “stages of grief,” these needs of mourning are not
orderly or predictable. Clients will address each need when ready to do
so, sometimes working on more than one need at a time. These needs
include:
Accepting the reality of the death
Whether the death was sudden or anticipated, acknowledging the full
reality of the loss can take weeks, months, and even years.
Feeling the pain of the loss
It is easier to avoid or deny the pain of grief than to confront it. Yet, it is
only reconciled through feeling the pain associated with the loss.
Remembering the person who died
Mourning involves allowing the pursuit of the relationship, instead of
trying to take memories away.
Developing a new self-identity
Part of self-identity comes from relationships with others. When
someone dies, the self-identity of those involved in these relationships
naturally changes.
Searching for meaning
When someone dies, it is natural to question the meaning of life as
death is a reminder of one’s lack of control.
Receiving ongoing support from others
The quality and quantity of support obtained from others has a major
influence on the capacity to heal. Drawing on the experiences and
encouragement of others is not a weakness but a healthy human need.
This question requires knowledge about the dynamics of loss,
separation, and grief. Even if the correct answer is not readily apparent,
it can be identified by eliminating the incorrect response choices.
924
Individuals do not sequentially move through stages of grieving, making
the response choice that mentions sequential progression incorrect.
Often people think that they are helpful by removing pictures of those
who have died or not speaking about them. They try to keep those
grieving busy. However, it is important to keep memories alive while
embracing the reality of the death by talking to others. Thus, not all
clients will need more time before talking about their loss.
Question Assesses
Human Development, Diversity, and Behavior in the Environment
101. C. Social workers should ensure that they do not engage in dual or
multiple relationships that may impact on the treatment of clients. Dual
or multiple relationships occur when social workers relate to clients in
more than one relationship, whether professional, social, or business.
Dual or multiple relationships can occur simultaneously or
consecutively.
Social workers should be alert to, and avoid, conflicts of interest that
interfere with the exercise of professional discretion and impartial
judgment. Social workers should inform clients when a real or potential
conflict of interest arises and take reasonable steps to resolve the issue
in a manner that makes clients’ interests primary and protects clients’
interests to the greatest extent possible. In some instances, protecting
clients’ interests may require termination of the professional relationship
with proper referral of clients. Social workers should not take unfair
advantage of any professional relationship or exploit others to further
their personal, religious, political, or business interests.
Social workers should not engage in dual or multiple relationships with
clients or former clients in which there is a risk of exploitation or
potential harm to a client. In instances when dual or multiple
relationships are unavoidable, social workers should take steps to
protect clients and are responsible for setting clear, appropriate, and
culturally sensitive boundaries.
The scenario suggests that a former client would like to enter into a new
relationship with a social worker. While this new relationship is
professional in nature, it still reflects the existence of a dual relationship.
While perhaps not readily apparent, the former client may be harmed by
this relationship with the social worker. For example, the client may
need treatment again in the future. Being a co-facilitator with the social
925
worker would preclude the client from receiving services, thereby
eliminating the availability of a clinical support for the former client if
needed. In addition, the client may personalize or feel that examples
provided by the social worker during group sessions relate to her own
service provision. While the former client is not currently receiving
services from the social worker, dual or multiple relationships can occur
consecutively such as described in the scenario.
Co-facilitating, even for a short time, would be inappropriate. In addition,
assisting the former client in preparing for the group is also problematic.
The former client may experience anxiety during this process and
confuse the social worker’s support with a therapeutic alliance. It is best
for the social worker to keep involvement to a minimum.
Question Assesses
Professional Values and Ethics
102. C. The function of silence, like its meaning, is culturally defined. There
are vast differences in culture, race, and/or ethnicity with regard to its
use. It has a “linkage” function in that it can bind people together as
well as isolate. Being silent with others can indicate rapport, respect,
and comfort as it acknowledges solidarity or that no conversation is
needed. Silence can also have an “affecting” function, meaning that it
has the power to affect others for both good and ill. Silence can be
interpreted as indifference, causing negative feelings by others who
observe it. Conversely, it can also be seen as a sign of respect, viewed
positively.
Assumptions should not be made that those who are silent are not
benefitting from others’ participation or not actively engaged. For some,
silence is seen as an opportunity given to others to speak or express
their ideas. This dialogue by others mutually benefits those who do not
verbalize. Silence also can indicate assent—there may be no need to
verbally affirm what is said as remaining quiet is seen as having the
same effect. Silence may be viewed as a way to retain harmony among
the group.
Silence can be seen as a way to agree with others without vocalizing.
This indirect form of communication is more common among some
cultures, including those who are Asian. In addition, some cultures are
more collectivist, placing the views of larger groups as more important
than those of individual members. Thus, remaining silent is seen as a
926
sign of respect even when having an opposing view. Dissenting
opinions are viewed as having possible negative repercussions for the
work of the overall group, which is prioritized.
In the scenario, there is no indication of the race, culture, and/or
ethnicity of other group members. However, the recent immigration of
the youth may have been mentioned as an indication that her
participation may be influenced by different cultural, racial, and/or ethnic
norms. Some races, cultures, and/or ethnicities are more dominant and
pervasive than others. This influences how people in both dominant and
minority cultures interact; this, in turn, can impact on a group’s
interactions. It is the social worker’s job as facilitator to encourage
participation and challenge behavior which inhibits it. The facilitator is
not responsible for what a member chooses to say or withhold in a
group—clients should not be forced to participate. What a social worker
can and must do is create an environment in the group where clients
can choose to contribute and where it is safe for them to do so. Thus, a
social worker should challenge and dilute any negative impacts of
prejudice which may arise in the group due to differences in
communication styles. Ensuring that any negative effects of social
prejudice are not tolerated will create a “safe space” where group
members can choose to express their opinions if they wish.
Question Assesses
Human Development, Diversity, and Behavior in the Environment
103. A. Engagement within the context of building and maintaining helping
relationships is defined as a point at which clients view treatment as a
meaningful and important process. It involves developing agreement
with social workers on the goals and tasks of treatment. Engagement
can also be described as the time when the therapeutic relationship or
therapeutic alliance forms between social workers and clients. The
engagement process is sometimes described using words like
cooperation, collaboration, participation, or buy in. During the
engagement process, clients’ worldviews including their values, core
beliefs, and ways of life are challenged to facilitate substantive change.
As clients realize the need to change, resistance can occur. Resistance
to change can occur throughout the problem-solving process as it helps
clients to protect the status quo. Closely related to resistance is
ambivalence, which is a condition of both wanting and not wanting a
particular change. Social workers should be alert to the forces of
927
ambivalence and, when necessary, assist clients in working through
these blocks to decision making and action. Such work involves various
interviewing and therapeutic techniques, but initially it is critical that
clients feel that social workers are there to help and will not be judging
or giving advice.
Material in quotation marks deserves particular attention and usually
relates to the answer. The client’s comment may result from
apprehension about the ability to make change or fear of the therapeutic
process. The client is in the beginning phase of treatment (engagement)
where the goal is to build a strong helping relationship with the social
worker. Informing the client does not assist with engagement and asking
about other situations distracts from the situation at hand. The best way
to deal with any resistance or apprehension is by educating the client
about what will happen in the future.
Question Assesses
Psychotherapy, Clinical Interventions, and Case Management
104. B. Defense mechanisms are psychological mechanisms aimed at
reducing anxiety. They were first discussed by Sigmund Freud as part
of his psychoanalytic theory and further developed by his daughter,
Anna Freud. Often unconscious, defense mechanisms are used to
protect clients from psychological pain or anxiety. While such
mechanisms may be helpful in the short term, alleviating suffering that
might otherwise incapacitate, they can easily become a substitute for
addressing the underlying cause and so lead to additional problems.
The solution, therefore, is to address the underlying causes of the pain
these mechanisms are used to defray.
Sublimation is a mature type of defense mechanism where socially
unacceptable impulses or idealizations are unconsciously transformed
into socially acceptable actions or behavior. It causes “id” impulses to
be channeled into refined and civilized behavior. Alfred Adler called
sublimation “the healthy defense mechanism” because it produced
socially beneficial outcomes for humanity.
This is a recall question on the defense mechanisms. It is not necessary
to memorize the definitions of the defense mechanisms, but their
meanings should be familiar.
928
Often questions on defense mechanisms include scenarios which
describe clients’ behavior. Thus, social workers should be able to
distinguish between the defense mechanisms based on client
verbalizations and actions within situational contexts.
Question Assesses
Human Development, Diversity, and Behavior in the Environment
105. B. Defense mechanisms are psychological mechanisms aimed at
reducing anxiety. They were first discussed by Sigmund Freud as part
of his psychoanalytic theory and further developed by his daughter,
Anna Freud. Often unconscious, defense mechanisms are used to
protect clients from psychological pain or anxiety. While such
mechanisms may be helpful in the short term, alleviating suffering that
might otherwise incapacitate, they can easily become a substitute for
addressing the underlying cause and so lead to additional problems.
The solution, therefore, is to address the underlying causes of the pain
these mechanisms are used to defray.
Conversion is a defense mechanism which occurs when cognitive
tensions manifest themselves in physical symptoms. The symptom may
be symbolic and dramatic and often acts as a communication about the
situation. Extreme symptoms may include paralysis, blindness,
deafness, becoming mute, or having a seizure. Lesser symptoms
include tiredness, headaches, and twitches. For example, a client’s arm
becomes suddenly paralyzed after the client has been threatening to hit
someone else.
Conversion is different from psychosomatic disorders where real health
changes are seen (such as the appearance of ulcers). It also is more
than malingering, where conscious exaggeration of reported symptoms
is used to gain attention. With time, symptoms will go away, especially if
clients’ stress is reduced, such as by taking them away from the initial,
anxiety-provoking situations.
This is a recall question on the defense mechanisms. It is not necessary
to memorize the definitions of the defense mechanisms, but their names
should be familiar. The correct answer could have been obtained simply
by recognizing that conversion was a defense mechanism.
Often questions on defense mechanisms include scenarios which
describe clients’ behavior. Thus, social workers should be able to
929
distinguish between the defense mechanisms based on client
verbalizations and actions within situational contexts.
Question Assesses
Human Development, Diversity, and Behavior in the Environment
106. B. Crises are defined as an acute disruption of psychological
homeostasis in which a client’s usual coping mechanisms fail and there
exists evidence of distress and functional impairment. The subjective
reaction to life experiences dictates clients’ abilities to cope or function.
The main cause of a crisis is a stressful, traumatic, or hazardous
event, but two other conditions must be present—(a) a client’s
perception of the event causes considerable upset or disruption and
(b) a client is unable to resolve the disruption by previously used
coping skills. Thus, it is a client’s subjective experience that signals
whether a crisis exists as it is the way that these experiences are
perceived by a client that cause a crisis. Clients can encounter life
stressors (deaths, health issues, and so on), but it is only if these
events are perceived as threats or beyond coping abilities that crises
occur.
The question requires knowledge about the difference between
subjective and objective data in assessment and treatment planning.
While all the response choices may be helpful in gathering information
relevant to a client’s state, a crisis is a subjective experience. Many
clients experience adversity and cope. Only the correct response choice
involves speaking with the client directly to understand her feelings
about recent events. Incorrect response choices involve reviewing or
obtaining objective, not subjective, information related to her
physical/neurological condition. Additionally, speaking to collaterals,
whose views about the current happenings may be different, are less
relevant than the client’s.
Question Assesses
Assessment, Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning
107. A. Cyclothymic disorder is a rare mood disorder which describes
clients who experience mood cycling over a 2-year period but have not
met the diagnostic criteria for bipolar I, bipolar II, or depressive
disorder. There is debate if cyclothymic disorder is a discrete disease
process, a temperamental variation, or a premorbid syndrome for
930
bipolar I or II, as many clients with cyclothymic disorder will develop
one of these conditions.
According to the DSM, there are six diagnostic criteria, with one
specifier:
1. For at least a 2-year period, there have been episodes of hypom
depressive experiences that do not meet the full DSM diagnostic c
hypomania or major depressive disorder.
2. The previous criteria had been present at least half the time during
period, with no more than 2 months of symptom remission.
3. There is no history of diagnoses for manic, hypomanic, or de
episodes.
4. The symptoms in criterion A cannot be accounted for by a psychotic
such as schizophrenia, schizoaffective disorder, schizophreniform dis
delusional disorder.
5. The symptoms cannot be accounted for by substance use or a
condition.
6. The symptoms cause distress or significant impairment in s
occupational functioning.
A specifier is “with anxious distress.”
The disorder can also be diagnosed in children or adolescents, but the
observational period for symptoms is 1 year rather than 2 years.
However, diagnosing in younger children should be considered with
clinical skepticism, as they are prone to moodiness, emotional
dysregulation, and overreacting to minor stressors as they do not yet
have adult coping skills. It is a fallacy to project adult behavioral norms
onto children and adolescents and pathologize age-appropriate and
typical behaviors.
This question requires recall about the DSM and its disorders,
specifically cyclothymic disorder. Social workers should be aware of
diagnostic criteria, including those for bipolar and related disorders. The
mention that the time frame is associated with the observational period
for adults provides a clue that it is different for children. It may also be
assumed that the observational period for adults would be longer than
931
that required for children. Such an inference may help to eliminate some
of the response choices with shorter time frames.
Question Assesses
Assessment, Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning
108. B. Emotional and psychological trauma result from extraordinarily
stressful events that destroy a sense of security, making a client feel
helpless and vulnerable in a dangerous world. Traumatic experiences
often involve a threat to life or safety, but any situation that leaves a
client feeling overwhelmed and alone can be traumatic, even if it does
not involve physical harm. It is not the objective facts that determine
whether an event is traumatic, but a subjective emotional experience of
the event. Several risk factors make clients susceptible to emotional
and psychological trauma. Clients are more likely to be traumatized by
a stressful experience if they are already under a heavy stress load or
have recently suffered a series of losses.
Emotional and psychological trauma can be caused by one-time events
or ongoing, relentless stress.
Not all potentially traumatic events lead to lasting emotional and
psychological damage. Some clients rebound quickly from even the
most tragic and shocking experiences. Others are devastated by
experiences that, on the surface, appear to be less upsetting.
Clients are also more likely to be traumatized by a new situation if they
have been traumatized before—especially if the earlier trauma occurred
in childhood. Experiencing trauma in childhood can have a severe and
long-lasting effect. Children who have been traumatized see the world
as a frightening and dangerous place. When childhood trauma is not
resolved, this fundamental sense of fear and helplessness carries over
into adulthood, setting the stage for further trauma.
An event will most likely lead to emotional or psychological trauma if it
happened unexpectedly; there was no preparation for it; there is a
feeling of having been powerless to prevent it; it happened repeatedly;
someone was intentionally cruel; and/or it happened in childhood.
The question contains a qualifying word—MOST. Emotional or
psychological trauma may occur because of events in adulthood or
those which were anticipated/preventable. However, events which
932
happen unexpectedly with no preparation or warning are those which
are associated with the greatest negative impacts. Clients who feel that
there is no way to prevent these traumatic circumstances are likely to
feel ongoing danger or that they are vulnerable for repeated incidents in
the future.
Question Assesses
Human Development, Diversity, and Behavior in the Environment
109. B. Structural family therapy (SFT) is similar to other types of family
therapies that view the family unit as a system that lives and operates
within larger systems, such as a culture, the community, and
organizations. This system—ideally—grows and changes over time.
But sometimes a family gets “stuck,” often resulting from behavioral or
mental health issues of one of its family members.
Rather than focus on the individual’s pathology, however, SFT
considers problems in the family’s structure—a dysfunction in the way
the family interacts or operates. SFT does not maintain that the family’s
interactions, or “transactions,” cause the pathology, but rather that the
family’s transactions support or encourage the symptoms. Transactions
are simply patterns of how family members routinely interact with each
other. Through its transactions, a family establishes a set of rules for its
daily functioning, and these rules form its “structure.” A social worker
employing SFT should first assess a family’s interactions, figuring out a
family’s hierarchy and alliances within a family. The social worker
composes a map or flow chart describing the process that a family
unconsciously follows.
Ultimately, the social worker’s goal is to change or modify the family
map or structure—to get it “unstuck” from its harmful transactions that
are supporting and amplifying certain issues or problems. They
delineate proper “boundaries” between family members and their
transactions or interactions. When boundaries are crossed, ignored,
and distorted, the family’s structure becomes dysfunctional.
Social workers using SFT identify a wide range of dysfunctional
communication and interaction patterns. Unlike more traditional
approaches that prescribe a supportive, empathetic-listening approach
to therapy, social workers using SFT get involved with a family’s
transactions. In this unique role, and in the context of the therapeutic
setting, a social worker will provoke the family members to interact and
933
speak about the problem or issue. The therapist asks questions, points
out harmful transactions, and uncovers not only dysfunctional patterns,
but positive behaviors or personal qualities that are ignored or
overlooked by a family.
During interactions that take place in therapy, hidden conflicts become
apparent, inappropriate or counterproductive transactional patterns are
observed, and, finally, ways to help a family change or restructure
interactions are made.
To assist with understanding the family system, social workers will ask
for “live” displays of concerns called enactments. The family will be
encouraged to engage in a difficult communication so that social
workers can best identify the current problematic patterns and
dynamics. SFT focuses on family interaction in the “here and now.” It is
less concerned with how their interactional styles evolved.
While several response choices may appear appropriate, the correct
answer is most closely associated with SFT. This approach focuses on
the boundaries, communication patterns, and interactions between
family members. Using this technique, a social worker takes a very
active role to provoke conflict and point out maladaptive behavior.
While the mother’s current mental status may be a concern and
requires assessment, it is not the correct answer as it does not most
directly relate to a SFT approach. Understanding each family member’s
concerns is also not directly related to SFT.
Question Assesses
Psychotherapy, Clinical Interventions, and Case Management
110. C. Peer supervision enables social workers to go beyond individual
limitations and to expand on their knowledge, skills, and experiences. It
involves groups of social workers with the same knowledge, skill
levels, and statuses meeting regularly to discuss challenges in the
profession, self-exploration, diversity and culture, new interventions
and solutions, and ethical dilemmas or situations in the workplace.
Peer supervision groups do not have defined leaders. As a result of
peer supervision, social workers may feel validated, discuss difficult
situations, self-explore, and learn different interventions and
perspectives. Peer supervision counteracts burnout and social isolation
as members are supported and feel group cohesion.
934
Members also learn to practice supervisory skills for when they become
supervisors in the field. They can do this because they practice giving
and receiving feedback as well as boundary management. Peer groups
serve as trusting environments where social workers talk about their
mistakes and feelings in the field.
The question asks about the primary or main way in which social
workers “learn” in peer supervision. Modeling is demonstration of a skill
or task which may occur in peer supervision but is not the primary
method for learning. Positive reinforcement is a technique to increase
behavior frequency by adding a desirable stimulus. For example,
praising actions can be very rewarding, making it likely that social
workers will do them again. While peer supervision can be supportive, it
is not the primary method for learning within these venues.
Feedback, specifically formative feedback, which is characterized as
nonevaluative and supportive, is regarded as crucial to improving
knowledge and skill acquisition in peer supervision. Formative feedback
represents information communicated to social workers by peers that is
intended to modify thinking or behavior. Formative indicates that it is
occurring while social workers are experiencing difficulties with client
situations, not after treatment has ended. It is instructional rather than
evaluative. Feedback from others who have had similar experiences is
the main method through which social workers gain new knowledge and
develop their skills in peer supervision.
Question Assesses
Psychotherapy, Clinical Interventions, and Case Management
111. C. Self-determination is a cornerstone of the social work profession.
Self-determination is built on the values of autonomy and respect for
the dignity and worth of all people. So, given the primacy of self-
determination, it is necessary to examine how its mandate can be met
when working with clients who are mandated to receive services.
Social workers respect and promote the right of clients to self-
determination and assist clients in their efforts to identify and clarify their
goals. Social workers may limit clients’ right to self-determination when,
in the social workers’ professional judgment, clients’ actions or potential
actions pose a serious, foreseeable, and imminent risk to themselves or
others (NASW Code of Ethics—Self-Determination).
935
Posing “a serious, foreseeable, and imminent risk to themselves or
others” typically applies to situations of suicidal or homicidal ideation.
Thus, the NASW Code of Ethics is giving priority to the principle of
protecting life over the principle of respecting self-determination which
can include initiating processes that may result in involuntary admission
for psychiatric treatment as a last resort.
This ethical standard does not say social workers may ignore self-
determination. It says they may limit self-determination. Implicit in this
language is the notion of the “least intrusive” course of action. In
instances when clients are receiving services involuntarily, social
workers should provide information about the nature and extent of
services and about the extent of clients’ right to refuse service (NASW
Code of Ethics—Informed Consent).
This standard recognizes that, even though involuntary clients are being
pressured into services, they still have certain rights. First, social
workers need to inform clients about the services being offered. For
instance, social workers should inform them about the purpose and
goals of the services, models of intervention used, research about
benefits and risks, and expectations as participants in services. Social
workers should inform clients about the extent of their right to refuse
services. Social workers should also help clarify the consequences if
clients do not do what has been mandated.
Self-determination is not simply an either/or situation. Honoring self-
determination as much as possible may be more difficult with some
clients than with others. Although social workers should recognize that
self-determination may be imperfect for involuntary clients, workers are
able to enhance self-determination through various intervention
strategies:
■ Social workers can empower clients by helping them set goals
objectives that they genuinely want to pursue—even if they did not init
choose to participate in services.
■ Social workers may be able to offer clients a range of choices about w
methods of intervention will be used (e.g., individual vs. family counseli
■ Social workers may be able to have clients pick their choice of prac
modality (cognitive vs. narrative therapy).
In addition, social workers should engage clients by empathizing and
acknowledging pressures placed on them, building trust, and validating
936
concerns, so clients are more willing to participate in services. In
appropriate instances, social workers can advocate with authorities to
honor client wishes and revise court orders or other mandates in
attempts to promote self-determination.
In the scenario, the social worker is “developing a contract.” A contract
is another name for an intervention or service plan and outlines goals,
objectives, time frames for completion, and so on. It is done during the
planning step of the problem-solving process, following engagement.
While it is important for a mandated client to understand the contents of
a court order related to treatment, such a review usually occurs prior to
planning, such as part of the informed consent process at the onset of
the therapeutic relationship. In addition, advocating for clinically
appropriate mandates does not “promote self-determination,” which is
the lens through which each response choice must be evaluated. Only
the correct answer elicits client input into the methods to be used, which
is central to client self-determination.
Question Assesses
Professional Values and Ethics
112. B. Policies, procedures, regulations, and laws can have a profound
impact on social work practice. Social workers who treat clients
involved with the legal system should be aware of problems that can
arise prior, during, and after the delivery of services. Many of these
issues can be avoided by clarifying and defining the nature of a social
worker’s role. For example, some clients may be uncertain about what
to expect from psychotherapy or have unrealistic hopes. Ethically, a
social worker is expected to work jointly with clients in the development
of treatment plans. By discussing what can and cannot be provided,
clients are offered realistic portrayals of what may be expected from
therapy, which may assist in deciding whether to work with a particular
social worker.
In this scenario, the client appears to be directing the social worker and
her behavior suggests that she believes the social worker is obligated to
contact the attorney. In fact, the social worker would have no such
obligation and would be wise to decline the client’s request, to clarify the
social worker’s role and to better understand the client’s expectations. If
the social worker elects to contact the attorney prior to discussing the
specifics and implications with the client, there is a risk that the client
may interpret the social worker’s action as an implied agreement to
937
113. become involved in the legal matter. If the social worker and client
ultimately determine that the client’s expectations were inconsistent with
the social worker’s understanding of the social worker’s role, there may
be a need for a referral to another professional who is better suited to
the client’s needs.
The incorrect response choices focus on contacting the attorney or
meeting with the attorney with the client present which is premature until
the expectations are understood.
Question Assesses
Professional Values and Ethics
B. In order to facilitate change through the problem-solving process, a
social worker should use various verbal and nonverbal communication
techniques to assist clients to understand their behavior and feelings.
In addition, critical to ensuring that clients are honest and forthcoming
during this process, social workers should build trusting relationships
with clients. These relationships develop through effective verbal and
nonverbal communication. Social workers should be adept at using
both forms of communication successfully, as well as understanding
them, because verbal and nonverbal cues will be used by clients
throughout the problem-solving process. Insight into their meaning will
produce a higher degree of sensitivity to clients’ experiences and a
deeper understanding of their problems.
A social worker should also display genuineness to build trust.
Genuineness is needed to establish a therapeutic relationship. It
involves listening to and communicating with clients without distorting
their messages and being clear and concrete in communications.
Another method is the use of positive regard, which is the ability to view
a client as being worthy of being cared about and as someone who has
strengths and achievement potential. It is built on respect and is usually
communicated nonverbally.
Communication is also facilitated by listening, attending, suspending
value judgments, and helping clients develop their own resources. A
social worker should always be aware of culturally appropriate
communication behaviors. It is also essential to be clear to establish
boundaries with clients to facilitate a safe environment for change.
938
Material in quotation marks deserves particular attention and usually
relates to the answer. The question also contains a qualifying word—
BEST. The client–social worker interaction in the scenario is occurring in
the first session. The first session focuses on engagement or building a
therapeutic alliance. The correct response choice is the one which
addresses the client’s belief that he is a failure and his comment about
not understanding “how things got so bad.” The incorrect response
choices may be actions that will be taken at some time during the
problem-solving process, but do not make him feel that the social
worker understands his situation. The question asks for the social
worker’s response to his statements. Central to the formation of a
therapeutic alliance is displaying empathy, which the social worker is
doing in the correct answer.
Question Assesses
Psychotherapy, Clinical Interventions, and Case Management
114. C. Relying on the expertise of other professions when needed can
reduce major liability risks for social workers and result in better
outcomes for clients. For example, in situations which require medical
or other expertise, social workers should look to obtain appropriate
guidance from others or else clients may be harmed. If such
consultation does not occur, social workers breach standards of care
through acts of omission (not acting when they should have done so).
Under the common law doctrine of standard of care, courts usually seek
to determine what a typical, reasonable, and prudent (careful) social
worker with the same or similar education and training would have done
under the same or similar conditions. In many instances, establishing
the standard of care is easy. But in other instances, it is not easy to
establish what constitutes ordinary, reasonable, and prudent practice.
Well-educated, skilled, thoughtful, and careful social workers may
disagree with colleagues about the best course of action in complex
circumstances, perhaps because of their different schools of thought,
training, and experience.
In the scenario, the social worker has “a lack of knowledge about this
medical condition and the medication prescribed,” which is causing
dramatic mood changes in the client. Thus, the social worker has an
ethical responsibility to learn more through consultation with an
appropriate medical professional. Failure to seek consultation may
adversely affect the client.
939
The reason for the contact is for the social worker to learn more about
the medical condition and medication. The social worker is not
collaborating, which is defined as working with another to produce or
create something. Joint or interdisciplinary work by both the social
worker and physician is not occurring. There is also no indication that
the physician is the treating medical professional of the husband, so the
social worker’s action is not an effort to enhance coordination of
services.
Question Assesses
Psychotherapy, Clinical Interventions, and Case Management
115. A. Enhanced coordination of client services can be achieved through
the use of alternative funding approaches. Blending or braiding funding
across related programs and across multiple agencies is a basic way
that state and local agencies can more effectively serve the holistic
needs of clients, more efficiently target high-priority performance goals,
and streamline administrative requirements. Blending and braiding of
fiscal resources aim to enhance service coordination to meet the
holistic needs of clients.
Some jurisdictions, particularly at the local level, have successfully used
blended and braided funding, but federal categorical limitations make
taking this concept to a larger scale difficult. The terms “blending” and
“braiding” are used frequently, often together, and generally with little
definition. However, they refer to two very different approaches to fiscal
coordination.
Blending funding involves comingling the funds into one “pot” where
social workers can draw down service dollars, personnel expenses can
be paid, or other program needs can be met. When funding is blended,
it goes into the “pot,” and when it is pulled back out to pay for an
expense, there is no means for the fiscal manager to report which
funding stream paid for exactly which expense. Blending funding is
politically challenging. Some funding streams cannot be blended. Other
funding streams will require the funder to allow an exception to how the
reporting normally functions. Instead of usual reporting, funders can opt
to accept reports on services and outcomes across the population being
served, rather than exactly which children, youth, and families received
services with their dollars. To blend funding, social workers need to
work closely with funders and ensure that reporting requirements are
met. Though it is challenging politically, once funders are on board,
940
blended funding is less challenging to implement than braided funding.
There is significantly less workload, as the tracking and accountability
happens across all of the funding streams. Rather than reporting to
funders on their funding stream alone, reporting is done on how the
collective funds are used. Blended funding can allow you to pay for
services that may not be allowable with more categorical funding
approaches. However, for many funders, the flexibility associated with
blending makes it seem too “risky” as it often looks like supplanting, and
they end up with less detailed information about how each of their
dollars have been spent.
Braided funding involves multiple funding streams utilized to pay for all
the services needed by a given population, with careful accounting of
how every dollar from each funding stream is spent. The term “braiding”
is used because multiple funding streams are initially separate, brought
together to pay for more than any one funding stream can support, and
then carefully pulled back apart to report to funders on how the money
was spent. Braided funding is often the only option. Federal funding
streams require careful tracking of staff time and expenses to ensure
that a federal funding stream only pays for those things directly
associated with the intent of the funding. Consequently, when multiple
funding streams are paying for a single program or system, the system
will need to be carefully designed to allow for sufficient reporting to
ensure each funding stream is only paying for activities eligible under
that funding stream. Braided funding requires significant effort to create
the systems for tracking how funding is utilized.
The design of a braided funding system that can respond to the
individualized needs of many types of clients will require social workers
to decide which services will be paid for by which funding streams.
Ideally, this decision happens after the needs of the individual or family
being served is identified, so that the funding does not drive the
services being provided. This type of braided model requires a clear
understanding of the eligible populations and the eligible services, so
that decisions on how to fund the services can be made post hoc, rather
than prior to discussing service needs with the families. The design of a
blended funding program is simpler than the design of a braided funding
system. Programs typically have clearly defined services that are
provided and sometimes have very defined populations who are eligible
for services.
The correct answer is identified through the process of elimination, with
each false assertion being excluded. Blending is often not preferred by
941
funders as they receive less detail about how monies are spent, while
braiding is frequently not seen as possible due to the burden of the
tracking associated with its implementation. Braiding requires detailed
reporting to ensure each funding stream is only paying for eligible
activities. Only the correct answer is accurate as both blending and
braiding are difficult to administer due to federal categorical limitations.
Question Assesses
Psychotherapy, Clinical Interventions, and Case Management
116. C. Operant conditioning attempts to understand complex human
behavior without studying the internal mental thoughts and motivations.
B. F. Skinner based his theory of conditioning on the preexistent theory
called “Law of Effect,” or the belief that responses that produce
satisfying effects are more likely to occur again and responses that
produce discomforting effects are less likely to occur again.
Punishment has as its objective to decrease the rate of certain
undesired behavior from occurring again. Punishment can be further
classified into two major parts—positive and negative.
Positive punishment focuses on decreasing the undesired behavior by
presenting negative consequences once undesired behavior has been
exhibited. When subjected to negative consequences, individuals are
less likely to repeat the same behavior in the future.
Negative punishment focuses undesired behavior by removing favorite
or desired items. When desired stimuli are removed, there is less
chance of the behavior occurring again in the future.
Reinforcement aims to strengthen or increase behavior frequency.
Positive reinforcement increases the likelihood that behavior will occur
again in the future by pairing it with desirable stimuli (reinforcers).
Negative reinforcement increases the probability that behavior will occur
again in the future by removing negative stimuli.
This is a recall question which relies on social workers understanding
various operant conditioning techniques. Negative punishment is when
a desirable stimulus is removed following an undesirable behavior for
the purpose of decreasing or eliminating the behavior. In the scenario,
the client takes away her daughter’s cell phone (a desirable stimulus)
942
with the desire to decrease her homework incompletion and tardiness
(targeted behaviors).
Question Assesses
Human Development, Diversity, and Behavior in the Environment
117. C. Reimbursement methodologies can have a dramatic impact on the
delivery of services. Social workers should be aware of different
payment policies and the implications of each.
Capitation is based on a payment per person, rather than a payment
per service provided. There are several different types of capitation,
ranging from relatively modest per-person per-month case management
payments to assist with care coordination to per-person per-month
payments covering all professional services (professional, facility,
pharmaceutical, clinical laboratory, durable medical equipment, and so
on). There may also be particular services that are “carved out” of such
payments. These may be handled on either a fee-for-service basis or by
delegation to a separate benefit management company. Capitation is
often used as a means of controlling growth in the cost of care.
Fee-for-service is a payment model where services are unbundled and
paid for separately. It gives an incentive to provide more treatments
because payment is dependent on the quantity of care, rather than
quality of care. Similarly, when clients are shielded from paying (cost-
sharing) by health insurance coverage, they are incentivized to
welcome any medical service that might do some good. Fee-for-service
is the dominant physician payment method in the United States.
In a bundled payment methodology, a single, “bundled” payment covers
services delivered by two or more providers during a single episode of
care or over a specific period of time. For example, if a client has
cardiac bypass surgery, rather than making one payment to the
hospital, a second payment to the surgeon, and a third payment to the
anesthesiologist, the payer will combine these payments for the specific
episode of care (i.e., cardiac bypass surgery). In some cases, one entity
(for instance, an accountable care organization) may receive the
bundled payment and subsequently apportion the payment among
participating providers. In other cases, the payer may pay participating
providers independently, but adjust each payment according to
negotiated, predefined rules in order to ensure that the total payments
to all of the providers for all of the defined services do not exceed the
943
total bundled payment amount. This latter type of payment methodology
is frequently referred to as “virtual” bundling. Bundled payment
arrangements are a type of risk-contracting. If the cost of services is
less than the bundled payment, participating providers retain the
difference. But if the costs exceed the bundled payment, providers are
not compensated for the difference.
This is a recall question which relies on social workers understanding
the effects that policies, procedures, regulations, and laws have on
practice. Reimbursement methodologies can dramatically impact the
ways in which services are coordinated and delivered. The question
focuses on a single payment for multiple services. Fee-for-service
would be excluded as it represents a separate reimbursement for each
service provided.
Capitation should not be confused with bundled payments. Capitation is
an actuarially determined payment per client who may or may not use
services. The distinction between capitation and bundled payment is
that capitation pays the same amount regardless of what clients need
clinically or receive. The calculation of the capitation amount derives
from actuarial principles of insurance. The big risk in capitation is
incidence risk. The question asks about “services provided,” making
bundled payment the correct answer over capitation.
Question Assesses
Psychotherapy, Clinical Interventions, and Case Management
118. A. Cultural identity is often defined as the identity of a group, culture,
or an individual, influenced by one’s belonging to a group or culture.
Certain ethnic and racial identities may also have privilege.
Cultural, racial, and ethnic identities are important, particularly for those
who are members of minority groups. They may instill feelings of
belonging to a particular group or groups and identification with that
group (i.e., shared commitment and values). Cultural, racial, and ethnic
identities are passed from one generation to the next through customs,
traditions, language, religious practice, and cultural values. Cultural,
racial, and ethnic identities are also influenced by the popular media,
literature, and current events.
Self-esteem or image can be negatively impacted by cultural issues,
especially when practices interfere with childhood development, such as
944
being subject to criticism or abuse; missing out on experiences that
would foster a sense of confidence and purpose; and/or receiving little
or no positive reinforcement for accomplishments. In adulthood, cultural
beliefs may compound life changes by further stigmatizing losing a job
or changing jobs, ending an intimate relationship, having legal or
financial troubles, struggling with addiction or substance abuse, having
children with emotional troubles, developing physical health concerns,
and so on.
People with poor self-image may work with social workers on becoming
more assertive, confident, and self-aware. Finding a sense of
accomplishment is a huge boost to self-esteem, and therapy can help
clients identify specific activities that boost confidence and competence.
In addition, many social workers focus on helping people develop self-
compassion so that they can develop more realistic, achievable goals
for themselves and treat themselves with kindness and encouragement.
Universalization is a supportive intervention used by social workers to
reassure and encourage clients. Universalization places client
experiences in the context of other individuals who are experiencing the
same or similar challenges, and it seeks to help clients grasp that their
feelings and experiences are not uncommon given the circumstances. A
social worker using this supportive intervention intends to “normalize”
client experiences, emotions, and reactions to presenting challenges.
By normalizing client experiences, social workers attempt to help avert
the client’s natural feelings of shame due to feeling alone or judged.
The scenario requires the correct answer to be chosen as it is “most
effective.” As the poor self-image of the client is presented as a
problem, it is necessary to select a response which will help the client
see that she is not alone or to blame for her situation. The incorrect
response choices may be actions that the social worker will take, but
they are not the most critical. The woman has not felt that she had any
other choice than to stay married. She may have been skeptical and
cautious about seeking help for fear of being mistreated or
misunderstood. Thus, trust is an important element in establishing a
therapeutic alliance. The client needs to know that the social worker can
be trusted and is competent to help her. Only the correct answer helps
build trust and rapport by helping her to see that the social worker
accepts and understands her situation.
Question Assesses
945
Human Development, Diversity, and Behavior in the Environment
119. A. Long-term alcohol dependence leads to a variety of moderate to
severe health problems. The longer and heavier the consumption, the
worse the physical results become. “Wet brain” is another way of
describing a condition called Wernicke-Korsakoff syndrome. It is
caused by a deficiency in vitamin B1 (thiamine). If “wet brain” is allowed
to progress too far, it will not be possible to recover from it.
Wernicke-Korsakoff syndrome is actually a combination of two separate
conditions: Wernicke’s encephalopathy and Korsakoff psychosis. These
two disorders combine to produce a variety of symptoms including
confusion, changes to vision, loss of muscle coordination, difficulty
swallowing, and speech problems. Hallucinations, loss of memory,
confabulation (occurs as clients make up stories to compensate for their
memory loss), inability to form new memories, inability to make sense
when talking, and apathy are due to Korsakoff psychosis. It is possible
for clients who are alcoholic to develop either Korsakoff psychosis or
Wernicke’s encephalopathy independently.
It is usual for the effects of Wernicke’s encephalopathy to become
noticeable first. These symptoms tend to come on suddenly. The first
sign that something is wrong will be that a client appears confused. This
can be hard to diagnose in a client who is habitually intoxicated. This
confusion differs from drunken confusion because it lasts even when a
client has not been drinking. Later, the symptoms of Korsakoff
psychosis will also become noticeable. In the beginning, only the ability
to form new memories will be damaged, so a client can still appear quite
lucid.
Clients who are alcoholic have poor dietary habits; over a long time, this
will lead to nutritional deficiencies. Lack of thiamine in the diet interferes
with glucose metabolism, which can then lead to atrophy in the brain.
Wernicke’s encephalopathy occurs due to damage to the thalamus and
hypothalamus. Korsakoff psychosis occurs because of damage to those
parts of the brain where memories are managed.
If wet brain syndrome has been allowed to progress too far, there may
be little that can be done to reverse the effects. Thiamine injections can
improve things greatly and may restore a client back to full recovery.
Those who have developed the chronic form of wet brain will be far less
946
likely to recover. In some cases, the best that can be done is prevention
of any further deterioration.
The only possible cure for wet brain syndrome is complete abstinence
from alcohol. Most of those who do find their way into recovery will be
able to regain all functioning that was lost due to Wernicke-Korsakoff
syndrome. Other clients will have to deal with lingering effects of the
damage, but they should be able to adapt and find a good life away
from alcohol.
The question contains a qualifying word—BEST—that requires social
workers to select the response choice which will optimally treat the root
cause of the symptoms listed. While some of the incorrect response
choices may be helpful to the client, only the correct answer addresses
the reason for the wet brain symptoms. Cognitive rehabilitation and
physical therapy address the manifestations of the vitamin B1 (thiamine)
deficiency, but not the underlying problem.
Question Assesses
Human Development, Diversity, and Behavior in the Environment
120. B. There are many ethical standards, including those on touching
clients, which speak to professional boundary issues that social
workers face in practice. Often the maintenance of appropriate
boundaries can be challenging for social workers. Social workers
should not engage in physical contact with clients when there is a
possibility of psychological harm to the client because of the contact
(such as cradling or caressing clients). Social workers who engage in
appropriate physical contact with clients are responsible for setting
clear, appropriate, and culturally sensitive boundaries that govern such
physical contact. The NASW Code of Ethics leaves the door open but
cautions social workers that they bear responsibility for ensuring that
no negative consequences ensue.
The language leaves open the possibility that, when used responsibly,
touch might occasionally make clinical sense, perhaps by helping a
client stay grounded or feel less isolated or overwhelmed.
However, social workers using touch within the context of a therapeutic
alliance should always carefully consider clients’ factors, such as
presenting problems and symptoms, personal touch and sexual history,
ability to differentiate types of touch, and clients’ ability to assertively
947
identify and protect their boundaries, as well as the gender and cultural
influences of both clients and social workers.
Social workers should have clear policies about touching, self-
disclosure, and other boundary areas which are applied consistently to
client situations. One of the most effective ways to establish clear
professional boundaries is for a social worker’s behavior to set the
standard for meetings with clients. Appropriate dress and behavior
should be displayed, and talk should not include social workers
discussing their personal life.
The scenario describes a client’s reaction to a hesitation by a social
worker to a hug at the end of a session. There is no indication that
physical touch has been discussed between the client and social worker
in this or any prior interaction. The client may be accusing the social
worker of being homophobic due to an exchange with someone else in
the past. In the scenario, it is necessary for the social worker to explain
the policy on physical touch, as well as other boundary issues.
Educating clients about the NASW Code of Ethics is essential so they
can better understand therapeutic or helping alliances and not confuse
them with friendships or romantic relationships. None of the incorrect
responses include this critical education.
It would not be appropriate to explore the client’s belief about being
rejected based on her sexual orientation when the session is ending. In
addition, there is no indication that the client’s statement is anything
other than a misunderstanding about professional boundaries between
the social worker and client. The client may not realize that the social
worker has a policy which is applied to all clients.
Simply telling the client that the social worker is not homophobic does
not provide an explanation for the hesitation. It also misses the
opportunity to educate the client about the importance of maintaining
professional boundaries and differentiating the therapeutic alliance from
other personal relationships.
Question Assesses
Professional Values and Ethics
121. C. Xenophobia is a severe aversion to foreigners, strangers, their
politics, and their cultures. Often, the term “xenophobia” is used
interchangeably with racism, yet the two are actually different. While
948
racism defines prejudice based solely on ethnicity, ancestry, or race,
xenophobia covers any kind of fear related to differences in culture,
race, and/or ethnicity, as well as other ways of being different. Those
with xenophobia do not understand or accept that their condition is
based in fear, yet it is the perceived threat of losing one’s own identity,
culture, and imagined superiority or purity that is the cause.
If left untreated, xenophobia can have seriously detrimental effects. An
individual who is xenophobic is liable to pass along highly generalized
and ungrounded perceptions to children and family members. Some
symptoms of a xenophobic person include:
■ Feelings of fear or dread when exposed to people or cultural it
perceived to be different
■ Apparent hostility toward people or cultures perceived to be different
■ Distrust aimed specifically toward cultures perceived to be different
■ Rash generalizations and stereotypes aimed at a set of people based
superficial qualities
Like all phobias, there is no universally specific cause that leads to the
development of xenophobia. It can be caused by unique experiences or
can simply be the result of alienation from people and cultures different
from one’s own.
Like many phobias, treatment focuses on first targeting the initial inciting
factor that caused the irrational and extreme fear. Therapy includes
talking about why the fear was unfounded and addressing any traumatic
experiences that caused the phobia, as well as identifying ways to deal
with symptoms. Sometimes behavioral techniques are used to
systematically and gradually confront the source of fear and learning to
control the physical and mental reactions to it. By facing the phobia
directly, it is possible to realize that fears are not grounded in real or
imminent danger.
This is a recall question which relies on social workers understanding
terminology related to cultural awareness and its barriers. Social
workers should promote conditions that encourage respect for cultural,
racial, and/or ethnic diversity and promote policies and practices that
demonstrate respect for difference; support the expansion of relevant
knowledge and resources; advocate for programs and institutions that
demonstrate cultural, racial, and/or ethnic competence; and promote
policies that safeguard the rights of all people.
949
If the definition of xenophobia is not known, it may be possible to narrow
the choices through eliminating other response choices.
Ephebiphobia, also known as hebephobia, is the fear of young people
or teenagers.
Mysophobia, also known as germophobia, is a common fear of general
contamination which can lead to extreme anxiety about contact with
others.
Question Assesses
Assessment, Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning
122. C. In the DSM, the chapter on substance-related and addictive
disorders also includes gambling disorder as the sole condition in a
category on behavioral addictions. Gambling disorder is similar to
substance-related disorders in clinical expression, brain origin,
comorbidity, physiology, and treatment. Recognition of these
commonalities will help people with gambling disorder get the
treatment and services they need, and others may better understand
the challenges that individuals face in overcoming this disorder.
While gambling disorder is the only addictive disorder included in DSM
as a diagnosable condition, internet gaming disorder is included in
section III of the DSM. Disorders listed there require further research
before their consideration as formal disorders. This condition is included
to reflect the scientific literature that persistent and recurrent use of
internet games, and a preoccupation with them, can result in clinically
significant impairment or distress. Other repetitive behavior, such as
that related to exercise, sex, or shopping, are not included because
there is insufficient peer-reviewed evidence to establish the diagnostic
criteria to identify these behaviors as mental disorders at this time.
This is a recall question which relies on social workers understanding
that empirical evidence supports treating other addictions, such as
gambling, like substance-related disorders since gambling behaviors
activate reward systems similar to those activated when abusing drugs.
In addition, gambling disorder produces behavioral symptoms that are
comparable to those produced by substance use disorders. Knowing
which other addictions are included in the DSM is essential when social
workers are working with clients who are experiencing impairment due
to excessive or repetitive behaviors.
950
123. Question Assesses
Assessment, Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning
C. Central to required social work documentation are case notes. Case
notes are an integral and important part of practice. Record-keeping
practices have an impact on client outcomes such that poor case notes
can result in poor decision making and adverse client outcomes. A
case note is a chronological record of interactions, observations, and
actions relating to a particular client.
The guiding principle for deciding what information should be included
in case notes is whether it is relevant to the service or support being
provided. Case notes can include, but are not limited to:
■ Biopsychosocial, environmental, and systemic factors
■ Considerations of culture, religion, and spirituality
■ Risk and resilience present
■ Facts, theories, or research underpinnings that impact on assessm
and/or treatment
■ Summaries or all discussions and interactions
■ Persons/services involved in the provision of supports including refe
information, telephone contacts, and email/written correspondence
■ Attendance/nonattendance at scheduled sessions
■ Discussions of legal and ethical responsibilities (client rig
responsibilities, and complaints processes; parameters of the service
support being offered and agreed to; issues relating to informed cons
information sharing, confidentiality, and privacy; efforts to promote
support client self-determination and autonomy)
■ Details of reasons for and outcomes leading up to or following
termination or interruption of a service or support
The question asks about the primary function. While case notes may
have multiple functions, the correct answer is the one that highlights
their usefulness in ensuring efficient and effective client care. Using
case records for worker development and/or reimbursement is not the
main reason that social workers keep case or progress notes. These
notes are used mainly by social workers to help them recall what was
done in prior meetings or sessions so that future work can pick up there.
951
It helps to ensure that time is not wasted talking about issues that were
already resolved. Additionally, by reviewing case notes prior to
sessions, social workers reduce the likelihood that important next steps
in discussions take place and therapeutic gaps do not emerge. Case
notes also help social workers look back to initial and other past
sessions to see progress made. This progress should be regularly
reviewed with clients.
Question Assesses
Psychotherapy, Clinical Interventions, and Case Management
124. A. The mission of the social work profession is rooted in a set of
professional values. These core values—service, social justice, dignity
and worth of the person, importance of human relationships, integrity,
and competence—are the foundation of social work’s unique purpose
and perspective.
These core values reflect what is unique to the social work profession.
Core values, and the principles that flow from them, should be balanced
within the context and complexity of the human experience.
When providing service, social workers’ primary goal is to help people in
need and to address social problems. Social workers elevate service to
others above self-interest. Social workers are encouraged to volunteer
some portion of their professional skills with no expectation of significant
financial return (pro bono service).
Social workers value social justice, challenging social inequities on
behalf of vulnerable and oppressed individuals and groups of people.
Social workers’ social change efforts are focused primarily on issues of
poverty, unemployment, discrimination, and other forms of social
injustice.
Social workers respect the inherent dignity and worth of the person,
treating each person in a caring and respectful fashion, mindful of
individual differences and cultural and ethnic diversity. Social workers
promote clients’ socially responsible self-determination. Social workers
seek to enhance clients’ capacity and opportunity to change and to
address their own needs.
Social workers recognize the central importance of human relationships,
as relationships between and among people are an important vehicle
952
for change. Social workers engage people as partners in the helping
process. Social workers seek to strengthen relationships among people
in a purposeful effort to promote, restore, maintain, and enhance the
well-being of individuals, families, social groups, organizations, and
communities.
Integrity means that social workers behave in a trustworthy manner.
Social workers act honestly and responsibly and promote ethical
practices on the part of the organizations with which they are affiliated.
Social workers practice within their areas of competence and develop
and enhance their professional expertise. Social workers continually
strive to increase their professional knowledge and skills and to apply
them in practice.
Social workers should uphold all social work values. However, this
scenario contains a qualifying word—MOST. The problem of finding an
appropriate provider presents a barrier to fulfilling the client’s wish to die
at home. Thus, the social worker should focus on developing creative
solutions to promoting the client’s need for self-determination.
Competence involves practicing within one’s expertise and developing
as a professional, which are not prevailing issues in this scenario.
Integrity, being honest or trustworthy, is also not directly related to the
situation presented.
Question Assesses
Professional Values and Ethics
125. C. Defense mechanisms are unconscious processes that protect
clients from unacceptable or painful ideas or impulses.
Projection involves clients attributing their own thoughts, feelings, and
motives to others. Thoughts most commonly projected onto another are
the ones that would cause guilt. For instance, a client might hate
someone, but the client’s superego tells the client that such hatred is
unacceptable. Thus, the client solves the problem by believing that the
other person hates the client.
Displacement is the redirection of an impulse (usually aggression) onto
a powerless substitute target. The target can be a person or an object
that can serve as a symbolic substitute. A client who is frustrated by
953
superiors on the job may go home and kick the dog or yell at a family
member.
Reaction formation is actually a mental process, transforming anxiety-
producing thoughts into their opposites in consciousness. A client goes
beyond denial and behaves in the opposite way to which the client
thinks or feels. By using reaction formation, the id is satisfied while
keeping the ego in ignorance of the true motives. In short, reaction
formation means expressing the opposite of inner feelings in outward
behavior.
The question contains a qualifying word—MOST. While the client may
be using more than one of the defense mechanisms listed, it is likely the
behavior constitutes reaction formation. The client is engaging in
actions, outrage, and advocacy, which are counter to his inner beliefs of
appreciation for his own mandated services.
Question Assesses
Human Development, Diversity, and Behavior in the Environment
126. B. Social workers should be familiar with various research techniques
which are applied to practice. Case-mix adjustment is the process of
statistically controlling for group differences when comparing
nonequivalent groups on outcomes of interest. It is done on a post hoc
basis, after the treatment groups have been formed and the
performance measures collected. The groups may be treatment
agencies, consumers, providers, programs, regions, or
states/jurisdictions. Any time these groups are to be compared on
performance indicators, case-mix adjustment should be considered.
For example, mental health authorities and providers in both the public
and private sectors are increasingly interested in measuring outcomes
of mental health care. Performance measurement is mandated by some
public mental health systems and managed care organizations. By
using comparative performance indicators, mental health systems can
track the effects of changes within their systems and the effectiveness
of routine care provision across sites. They can identify sites providing
the highest quality care and sites that may need to improve the quality
of care they provide.
However, populations of mental health consumers served by different
behavioral health care agencies can be vastly different. Agencies
954
serving individuals with severe and comorbid impairment cannot
equitably be compared using raw outcome scores to agencies serving
individuals with less challenging mental health concerns. The outcomes
that providers or agencies strive for, and for which they are held
accountable, are only partly under their control; many individual and
environmental variables affect outcomes independently of care. These
critical case-mix variables are not evenly distributed across groups.
Case-mix adjustment attempts to identify the individual and
environmental variables that influence outcomes, measure those
variables, correct for their influence through post hoc statistical
methods, and display the case-mix adjusted results in ways that allow
for ease of interpretation and use.
Case-mix adjustment is a partial correction that cannot create perfectly
equivalent groups or duplicate the rigor of experimental assignment. In
a true experiment, the researcher assigns people randomly to different
treatment groups, controls the administration of the treatment, and
measures the outcome or dependent variable. Statistical laws tell us
that, with enough people, the average characteristics will be equal in all
groups; the only systematic variation is the treatment. So, if the results
show that the groups are unequal on the dependent variable, one
concludes that the treatment caused the difference. Case-mix
adjustment is a post hoc effort to correct for differences among the
groups served by the agencies since random selection does not take
place.
Case-mix adjustment has an additional function in setting appropriate
reimbursement rates in capitation contracts. Adequately and fairly
compensating providers on the basis of how much service will be
needed, as indicated by case-mix adjustment, removes the incentive for
providers to attract only those who are relatively healthy and avoid
those with more severe conditions that will require more services.
There may be situations where case-mix adjustment is unnecessary.
This situation will occur when the case-mix adjusted results lead to the
same conclusions as the unadjusted results regarding group level
performance. It may also occur when the gain from doing case-mix
adjustment is considered to be small relative to the costs, or when the
potential case-mix indicators that are available in a limited dataset do
not correlate with the outcome. In the latter case, it is important to
recognize that any results to be compared among groups are
unadjusted and therefore potentially misleading.
955
Random sampling assists with creating equivalent treatment and control
groups prior to the delivery of interventions.
Descriptive statistics describe the basic features of data in a study. They
provide simple summaries and form the basis of virtually every
quantitative analysis of data.
This is a recall question which relies on social workers being able to
apply research principles to practice. Social workers should be able to
correctly interpret empirical findings. Understanding whether outcomes
are related to differences in sample selection or client characteristics
rather than interventions is critical as social workers may inappropriately
conclude that services are effective or ineffective when they are not.
Question Assesses
Psychotherapy, Clinical Interventions, and Case Management
127. A. A valuable source for data is collateral contacts or informants—
relatives, friends, teachers, physicians, and others who possess insight
into clients’ lives. Collateral sources are particularly important when,
because of developmental capacity or functioning, clients’ ability to
generate information may be limited or distorted. For example,
assessments of clients with memory or cognitive limitations will be
enhanced with data that collaterals (family members and friends) can
provide.
Social workers should exercise discretion when deciding that such
information is needed and in obtaining it. Clients can assist in this effort
by suggesting collateral contacts who may provide useful information.
Social workers should weigh the validity of information obtained from
collateral sources. It is important to consider the nature of their
relationships with clients and the ways in which that might influence
these contacts’ perspectives. Family members may be emotionally
involved in client difficulties, skewing their perceptions. Other service
providers may have limited contact with clients, with narrow views of
their situations. As with other sources of information, input from
collateral contacts should be critically viewed and weighed against other
information.
The question contains a qualifying word—MOST. While all the sources
listed may provide some useful information, it is likely that the client’s
adult son will be able to provide the most detailed and accurate
956
information as he lives with her. The scenario states that the client is
disoriented. Additionally, clients often overrate their functioning.
Therefore, the client herself is not the best person to provide information
on her safety. While she is getting visiting nurse services and home
delivered meals, agency staff involvement in the home is limited to
medication administration and delivery of meals. The social worker’s
concern about her safety does not focus on her day program as she is
constantly supervised there. The client’s functioning at the day program
may also be different than at home. Staff in the home will not be able to
comment on her ability to perform activities of daily living (ADLs) like
bathing, toileting, and cooking.
Collateral contacts who live with clients—in this scenario, her adult son
—are usually very good sources of information about clients’ functioning
as they have the opportunity to observe them for extended periods
while performing all tasks which are required for safe, daily living.
Question Assesses
Assessment, Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning
128. A. Social workers should be familiar with ethical standards related to
payment for services. There are many practices which are not ethical
such as setting unreasonable fees, bartering in most instances, and
soliciting extra fees from clients when services can be provided by
agencies at no additional cost. In addition, an arrangement where
social workers accept a percentage of other independent providers’
fees for professional services that they have not directly provided is not
ethical. Receiving money for referrals made to other professionals
constitutes fee splitting and is strictly prohibited. Costs of social work
services should be established at market value and paid per
agreement or contract with clients for services actually received.
Fee splitting represents a conflict of interest which may adversely affect
client care and well-being. For example, clients may not necessarily be
referred to the most appropriate professionals, but instead those with
whom referring social workers have fee splitting or commission payment
type arrangements. Fee splitting does not necessarily result in a
boundary violation but could do so. This practice can also occur with
client consent but fee splitting still creates a conflict of interest which is
ill advised.
957
This is a recall question which relies on social workers understanding
the ethical issues regarding payment for services, and specifically the
practice of fee splitting.
Question Assesses
Professional Values and Ethics
129. C. An interdisciplinary team is a group of individuals from different
disciplines, each with unique skills and perspectives, who work
together toward a common purpose or goal. The benefits of this
approach are well documented. Interdisciplinary teams are often seen
as advantageous to clients because they do not have the burden of
navigating multiple service systems and communicating to multiple
providers who are involved in their care.
The question contains a qualifying word—FIRST. While more than one
response choice may be helpful throughout the process, the order in
which they are to occur is critical. A biopsychosocial history may not be
needed or appropriate. The team will ultimately decide the assessments
required and develop the plan. It is also premature to outline the
timeline for moving as the specific goals and objectives which need to
be accomplished before the move have not been set.
The initial action should be to identify the requisite skills needed.
Without knowing what other disciplines need to be represented, social
workers will be unable to understand their roles, as well as those of
others, on interdisciplinary teams. Central to effective interdisciplinary
team approaches is the seeking to establish common ground with other
professionals, including commonalities in goals. Professionals should
also acknowledge the differences within the field and across other
disciplines.
Question Assesses
Psychotherapy, Clinical Interventions, and Case Management
130. A. Social workers should respect clients’ right to privacy or
confidentiality. In addition, social workers may only disclose
confidential information when appropriate with valid consent from a
client or a person legally authorized to consent on behalf of a client.
Social workers should protect the confidentiality of all information
obtained in the course of professional service, except for compelling
958
professional reasons. The general expectation that social workers will
keep information confidential does not apply when disclosure is
necessary to prevent serious, foreseeable, and imminent harm to a
client or others.
Social workers should also provide clients with reasonable access to
records. Social workers who are concerned that clients’ access to their
records could cause serious misunderstanding or harm to a client
should provide assistance in interpreting the records and consult with a
client regarding the records. Social workers should limit clients’ access
to their records, or portions of their records, only in exceptional
circumstances when there is compelling evidence that such access
would cause serious harm to a client. Both clients’ requests and the
rationale for withholding some or all the record should be documented
in clients’ files. When providing clients with access to their records,
social workers should take steps to protect the confidentiality of other
individuals identified or discussed in such records.
The scenario clearly states that “the social worker is not worried about
the client seeing the information in the record.” Thus, there is no
compelling reason to limit the client’s access to her record. The client’s
lack of explanation about what will be done with the information does
not change the social worker’s duty to send a copy of the entire record
to the client.
It is inappropriate for the social worker to meet with the former client.
Termination has already occurred, and the former client has the right to
withhold the reason for the request. The client can decide whether to
share all, some, or none of the information with others once the client
receives and reviews the record. It is always good to have requests put
in writing, but not required as the information is being sent to the client
who ultimately is in control of the information requested.
Question Assesses
Psychotherapy, Clinical Interventions, and Case Management
131. B. Positive psychology is the scientific study of the strengths that
enable individuals, families, and communities to thrive. The field is
founded on the belief that people want to lead meaningful and fulfilling
lives, to cultivate what is best within themselves, and to enhance their
experiences of love, work, and play.
959
Positive psychology is a reaction against psychoanalysis and behavioral
analysis, which focus on negative thinking and emphasize maladaptive
behavior. It builds further on the humanistic movement, which
encouraged an emphasis on happiness, well-being, and positivity, thus
creating the foundation for what is now known as positive psychology.
Positive psychology is concerned with eudaimonia, “the good life,” or
flourishing, living according to what holds the greatest value in life—the
factors that contribute the most to a well-lived and fulfilling life. While not
attempting a strict definition of the good life, positive psychologists
agree that one must live a happy, engaged, and meaningful life in order
to experience “the good life” or use signature strengths every day to
produce authentic happiness and abundant gratification.
Psychoanalysis refers both to a theory of how the mind works and a
treatment modality. It is based on the belief that people could be cured
by making conscious their unconscious thoughts and motivations, thus
gaining insight. The aim is to release repressed emotions and
experiences (i.e., make the unconscious conscious).
Psychoeducation refers to the process of providing education and
information to those seeking or receiving services and their family
members.
This is a recall question which requires social workers to be familiar with
a type of psychology which is rooted in the humanistic movement and
has many similarities to the strengths perspective used by social
workers. Positive psychology is a strengths-based approach to working
with clients.
When the names of diagnoses, theories, or approaches are listed as
response choices, it is often wise to think about each of the response
choices listed before looking at the question. Getting the question
correct relies on knowing about all the response choices. Whenever
there is a gap in knowledge about one of the diagnoses, theories, or
approaches listed, the likelihood of getting the question wrong
increases. Knowledge should be used to try to narrow down the
possibilities by eliminating incorrect response choices, leaving those
that are candidates for selection.
Question Assesses
Human Development, Diversity, and Behavior in the Environment
960
132. B. Often values and ethics are terms that are used interchangeably.
Though different, together they form the basis for making decisions.
Values are beliefs that a person holds about aspects of life and serve
as guiding principles that influence behavior. Every individual has a set
of values through which the individual looks at all things and also at the
world.
Ethics refers to the guidelines for conduct or a system of moral
principles. For example, killing and rape are acts which violate a code of
conduct which dictates what is wrong and what is right. When these
ethics were not in place, no human behavior could be categorized as
good or bad, which is what led to the development of these standards to
guide human behavior in a society.
The question contains a qualifying word—BEST. While the incorrect
response choices contain some true assertions about values and/or
ethics, they do not contain the basic distinction that values are
principles held by people to help guide behaviors while ethics are moral
codes of conduct that decide what is wrong and what is right about
these behaviors.
There is incomplete or inaccurate information contained in the incorrect
response choices. For example, ethics can be unwritten and do not only
apply to professional behavior. Values and ethical beliefs can also both
change over time, though such changes often occur slowly.
Question Assesses
Professional Values and Ethics
133. B. According to psychologist Jean Piaget, children progress through a
series of four critical stages of cognitive development. Each stage is
marked by shifts in how kids understand the world.
■ Sensorimotor stage, from birth to age 2
■ Preoperational stage, from age 2 to about age 7
■ Concrete operational stage, from age 7 to age 11
■ Formal operational stage, begins at age 11 and spans into adulthood
According to Piaget, children in the preoperational stage of cognitive
growth (ages 2–7) use magical thinking until they learn the properties of
physics and reality—a trial and error process that takes years. Little
961
children do indeed have a hard time drawing the distinction between
what is real and what is not, and they sometimes get confused and think
that what occurs in their heads is happening in the outside world.
Children do not make these errors because they are delusional or
confused about the rules of the physical world. The more likely reason
that imagination and fact can blend together is that little kids have acute
powers of perception—they are experts at seeing, hearing, feeling,
thinking, and imagining—but they cannot reflect on those perceptions.
In other words, they think a lot, but they do not yet think about thinking.
When adults wake up from a scary dream, the primitive brain feels the
emotion, but advanced reasoning puts it in context. Kids, on the other
hand, operate more from the gut, with less contemplation or insight
about what they have experienced.
Around the age of 4, kids turn a corner and become more aware of their
own perceptions and more astute about distinguishing appearance and
reality, even though it is a process that takes time to truly sink in. One
theory for why this happens is that the right brain, which processes
perceptions, and the left brain, which analyzes them, start to
communicate better with each other, leading to a higher level of insight
for kids in the later preschool years.
This is a recall question which relies on social workers understanding
stages of cognitive development. Even when theorists are not explicitly
stated in questions, correct answers require knowledge of their specific
work. For example, being familiar with the work of Kohlberg on moral
reasoning, Piaget on cognitive development, and Erikson on
psychosocial development can assist with narrowing down response
choices to identify the correct answers to questions in their respective
areas of development.
Question Assesses
Human Development, Diversity, and Behavior in the Environment
134. B. For a client to be diagnosed with gender dysphoria, the client must
exhibit a strong and persistent cross-gender identification (not merely a
desire for any perceived cultural advantages of being the other sex).
In children, the disturbance is manifested by six (or more) of the
following for at least 6 months:
■ Repeatedly stated desire to be the other sex (must be present)
962
■ In boys, preference for cross-dressing or simulating female attire; in g
insistence on wearing only stereotypical masculine clothing
■ Strong and persistent preferences for cross-gender roles in make-bel
play or persistent fantasies of being the other gender
■ A strong rejection of toys/games typically played by one’s gender
■ Intense desire to participate in the stereotypical games and pastime
the other gender
■ Strong preference for playmates of the other gender
■ A strong dislike of one’s sexual anatomy
■ A strong desire for the primary (e.g., penis, vagina) or secondary (
menstruation) characteristics of the other gender
In adolescents and adults, the disturbance is manifested by symptoms
such as a stated desire to be the other gender, frequently passing as
the other gender, desire to live or be treated as the other gender, or the
conviction of having the typical feelings and reactions of the other
gender.
Gender dysphoria causes clinically significant distress or impairment in
social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning. Gender
dysphoria is not concurrent with a physical intersex condition.
There is a specifier for gender dysphoria in the DSM—post-transition,
that is, the client has transitioned to full-time living in the desired gender
(with or without legalization of gender change) and has undergone (or is
undergoing) at least one medical procedure or treatment regimen,
namely—hormone treatment or gender reassignment surgery—
confirming the desired gender.
The question seeks the criterion that “must” be present. Dislike of one’s
sexual anatomy and preference for clothing and playmates of the other
gender are indicators of gender dysphoria, but do not have to be
present. The only criterion that must be present is that the client must
want to be the other gender or believe to be the other gender.
“Gender nonconforming” is a broader term that can include clients with
gender dysphoria, but it can also describe those who feel that they are
neither only male nor only female. “Transgender” is an umbrella term for
clients whose gender identity and/or expression is different from cultural
expectations based on the gender they were assigned at birth. Being
963
transgender does not imply any specific sexual orientation. Clients may
be straight, gay, lesbian, bisexual, and so on.
Question Assesses
Assessment, Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning
135. B. Effective discharge planning and appropriate post-discharge care
are key for client well-being. Discharge planning usually begins early in
treatment or clients’ inpatient stays. In general, discharge planning is
conceptualized as having four steps: (a) assessment; (b) development
of plans; (c) provision of service, including providing education and
making service referrals; and (d) follow-up/evaluation.
Discharge summaries serve as the primary documents communicating
clients’ care plans. Often discharge summaries are the only
communication with subsequent client care settings. High-quality
discharge summaries are generally thought to be essential for
promoting client safety when returning home or going to other settings.
While the format of discharge summaries varies across settings, there
are some required components:
1. Reason for admission
2. Significant findings
3. Procedures and treatment provided
4. Discharge condition and prognosis
5. Client and family instructions (as appropriate)—including needed
services by other providers
Discharge summaries also should be signed by medical or other
treating professionals.
The question is seeking the response choice that “accurately describes
the appropriateness” of including the material mentioned. Each
response choice must be read carefully and evaluated individually. The
correct answer is identified through the process of elimination, with
response choices containing inaccuracies excluded.
Question Assesses
964
Assessment, Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning
136. B. Mirroring is a technique used to gain rapport at the unconscious
level. Mirroring, as the name suggests, means copying another
person’s gestures, tone of voice, or even catchphrases. Mirroring has
numerous benefits provided social workers carry it out properly.
One reason that spiders are hated, but other mammals are not, is that
mammals look much more like people than insects. Individuals are
hard-wired to like and feel comfortable around other humans.
When mirroring, social workers try to convince the subconscious mind
of clients that they are like them. If it works, clients feel comfortable
without knowing why. In mirroring, social workers copy the gestures of
clients consciously with the goal of making them feel comfortable, even
if they did not feel that way initially. Mirroring requires copying their
gestures, using the same tone, or talking about common interests in a
manner that is slow enough to make it unnoticeable to their conscious
mind. There are other features that can be mirrored using
neurolinguistic programming such as blinking rate, facial expressions, or
tension in the muscles of the person. Even repeating words can lead to
successful mirroring. For instance, if clients say “yes” social workers say
“yes,” they say “no” social workers say “no,” and so on. The key is to do
it very moderately and occasionally, without making clients suspicious.
If social workers want to make sure that mirroring was successful and
clients are feeling comfortable, they can assume a new gesture. If
clients unconsciously copy, then mirroring has been successful.
There are other verbal communication techniques.
Clarifying uses questioning, paraphrasing, and restating to ensure full
understanding of clients’ ideas and thoughts, including formulation of
the existing problem.
Reframing shows clients that there are different perspectives and ideas
that can help to change negative thinking patterns and promote change.
Selecting the correct answer requires knowledge of the verbal and
nonverbal communication techniques listed. The question is asking
about a “nonverbal technique.” Mirroring is the only technique that
includes nonverbal communication. In addition, the sole function of
mirroring is rapport building while the other techniques focus more on
965
gathering information, ensuring understanding of information provided,
or challenging negative thinking.
Question Assesses
Psychotherapy, Clinical Interventions, and Case Management
137. A. Social workers should be aware of the effects policies, procedures,
regulations, and laws have on practice. Many of these impacts concern
choices made based on equality and equity. While there is a common
misconception that equity and equality mean the same thing and that
they can be used interchangeably, they cannot as there is an important
distinction between them. The idea of equality is that everyone should
receive the same treatment and opportunities, a notion that is
fundamental to democracy and the belief that everyone should benefit
from the fruits of a good society.
However, when a society is stratified into poles of advantage and
disadvantage, with the inevitable consequences of privilege and
exclusion, the notion of equal access is just an ideal and does not exist
in reality. Fair access, then, may take on a different meaning than equal
access and opportunity. Rather than fairness occurring from uniform
distribution (equality), where there is an entitlement to the same
amount, there may be a need to level the playing field. In other words,
equity is concerned with fairness by remedying historic injustices that
have prevented or diminished access in the first place.
Policies aimed at ensuring that everyone can have access to the same
opportunities (equity) provide more resources to those who need them.
Fidelity is the quality of being loyal or faithful.
This is a recall question which relies on social workers understanding
the values used in making decisions about policies, procedures,
regulations, and laws. It requires knowing the definitions of each of the
words listed as response choices.
Question Assesses
Psychotherapy, Clinical Interventions, and Case Management
138. C. The severity of an alcohol use disorder is based on the number of
criteria met. The severity of the alcohol use disorder is defined as: mild
(presence of 2–3 symptoms), moderate (presence of 4–5 symptoms),
966
or severe (presence of six or more symptoms). This is a recall question
which relies on social workers understanding the severity of the
impairment due to alcohol use disorder. In the scenario, the client has
six or more signs, indicating severe impairment.
The following six criteria were explicitly described:
1. Drank more than intended
2. Wanted to cut down drinking, but could not
3. Spent a lot of time drinking
4. Had employment troubles due to drinking
5. Continued to drink even though it caused marital breakup
6. Engaged in risky behavior (walking in the street) when drinking
Alcohol intoxication is a harmful physical condition caused when more
alcohol than the body can handle is ingested and can include alcohol
poisoning. Alcohol dependence is the medical term used to describe
use of alcohol that continues even when significant problems related to
their use have developed. Alcohol dependence is not a current DSM
diagnosis as the reliance on alcohol is included in alcohol use disorder.
Question Assesses
Assessment, Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning
139. A. Ethnography affords social workers a powerful and unique vehicle
for obtaining an in-depth, contextualized understanding of clients’
perspectives and experiences necessary for effective social work
practice and advocacy. Unlike other forms of social inquiry such as
surveys, interviews, and analysis of administrative databases, a
hallmark of ethnographic research is sustained engagement in clients’
lives. Participant observation is a qualitative method with roots in
traditional ethnographic research, in which the objective is to help
social workers learn the perspectives held by clients. As qualitative
researchers, social workers presume that there will be multiple
perspectives within any given community. They are interested both in
knowing what those diverse perspectives are and in understanding the
interplay among them. Qualitative researchers accomplish this through
observing and participating, to varying degrees, in a community’s daily
967
activities. Participant observation always takes place in community
settings, in locations believed to have some relevance to the issues at
hand. The method is distinctive because social workers approach
participants in their own environment. Social workers who engage in
participant observation try to learn what life is like for “insiders” while
remaining, inevitably, as “outsiders.”
While in these community settings, social workers make careful,
objective notes about what they see, recording all accounts and
observations as field notes in a field notebook. Informal conversation
and interaction with members of the study population are also important
components of the method and should be recorded in the field notes, in
as much detail as possible. Information and messages communicated
through mass media such as radio or television may also be pertinent
and thus desirable to document.
The question contains a qualifying word—BEST. The question asks for
the method which is used with “an ethnographic approach.” Social
workers need to know the meaning of “ethnographic,” including basic
research methods which would be consistent with this inquiry.
Participant observation approaches have historically been important
components of ethnographic research.
The incorrect response choices are all research terms, but do not relate
to ethnography in any way.
Experimental design is a blueprint that enables the testing of
hypotheses by reaching valid conclusions about relationships between
independent and dependent variables. It refers to the conceptual
frameworks within which experiments are conducted.
Self-administered questionnaires are data collection instruments, either
in paper or electronic form, which respondents complete on their own.
Question Assesses
Assessment, Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning
140. C. The mission of the profession is rooted in a set of social work core
values. These core values, embraced by social workers throughout the
profession’s history, are the foundation of social work’s unique purpose
and perspective and include:
968
Service—providing help and resources to help others achieve their
maximum potential
■ Social justice—ensuring equal rights, protections, and opportunities for
■ Dignity and worth of the person—believing everyone is valuable
■ Importance of human relationships—understanding how interactions
be used
■ Integrity—being trustworthy
■ Competence—providing services within skills and abilities
This constellation of core values reflects what is unique to the social
work profession.
Unconditional positive regard is a term used by humanist psychologist
Carl Rogers to describe a technique used in his nondirective, client-
centered therapy. According to Rogers, unconditional positive regard
involves showing complete support and acceptance of a client no matter
what that person says or does. It is the ability to view a client as being
worthy of being cared about and as someone who has strengths and
achievement potential. It is built on respect and is usually
communicated nonverbally.
Social workers accept and support clients, no matter what they say or
do, placing no conditions on this acceptance. It means caring for clients
as separate people, with permission to have their own feelings and
experiences. Rogers firmly believed every person was born with the
potential to develop in positive, loving ways. Through the provision of
services, social workers become clients’ next chance, maybe their last
chance, to be welcomed, understood, and accepted. Acceptance
creates the conditions needed for change.
This is a recall question which relies on social workers knowing both the
core social work values and the meaning of unconditional positive
regard. Self-determination is not a core social work value, so it should
be eliminated as a possible correct response. The correct answer
distinguishes itself from the other choices as the dignity and worth of an
individual are directly related to the notion of unconditional acceptance
and support. Social workers should accept and support clients, no
matter what they say or do, placing no conditions on this acceptance.
This goal can only be accomplished if there is true belief in the dignity
and worth of all humans.
969
141. Question Assesses
Professional Values and Ethics
A. Dyspareunia is sexual dysfunction characterized by pain that occurs
during sexual intercourse. It is not a disease but rather a symptom of
an underlying physical or psychological disorder. The pain, which can
be mild or severe, may occur in the genitals, the pelvic region, or the
lower back. The condition is much more common among women than
among men. Treatment for dyspareunia is aimed at identifying and
properly treating the underlying disorder.
There are many potential causes of dyspareunia including vaginismus
(a condition characterized by involuntary spasms of the vaginal
muscles), insufficient vaginal lubrication, scars from an episiotomy (an
incision made to facilitate childbirth), thinning and dryness of the vaginal
wall due to estrogen deficiencies accompanying menopause or
breastfeeding, and inadequate foreplay. Conditions that may cause pain
upon vaginal penetration include, but are not limited to, pelvic
inflammatory disease, ovarian cysts, and endometriosis. Other causes
include infections, such as sexually transmitted diseases, which may
irritate the vaginal walls; bladder or other urinary tract disorders such as
cystitis or urethritis; cancer in the sex organs or the pelvic region;
arthritis (especially in the lower back); and allergic reaction to clothes,
spermicides or latex in condoms, and diaphragms.
For men, dyspareunia can result from such disorders as irritation of the
skin of the penis due to an allergic rash; sexually transmitted diseases,
which may irritate the skin of the penis; physical abnormalities of the
penis; and infections of the prostate gland or testes.
This is a recall question about sexual dysfunction. It is necessary to
know both general key concepts and specific terms associated with all
of the KSAs. Terms do not need to be recalled from memory, but there
should be a general familiarity with them because of studying so that
they can be matched to definitions. All the response choices, except the
correct one, are not associated with sexual dysfunction. Thus, knowing
that this is a term to describe a sexual issue would be sufficient to select
the correct answer even if its exact meaning is unknown.
Question Assesses
Assessment, Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning
970
142. B. Object permanence is the understanding that objects continue to
exist even when they cannot be observed (seen, heard, touched,
smelled, or sensed in any way). Object permanence occurs during the
first of Piaget’s four stages, the sensorimotor stage. Piaget assumed
that a child could only search for a hidden toy if she or he had a mental
representation of it. Piaget found that infants searched for hidden toys
when they were around 8 months old.
Object permanence typically starts to develop between 4 and 7 months
of age and involves a baby’s understanding that when things disappear,
they are not gone forever. Before a baby understands this concept,
things that leave his view are gone, completely gone. Developing object
permanence is an important milestone. It is a precursor to symbolic
understanding (which a baby needs to develop language, pretend play,
and exploration) and helps children work through separation anxiety.
The question requires knowledge of cognitive development, including
key milestones. Research suggests that development of object
permanence may begin before 4 months and be in place earlier than
Piaget originally hypothesized. However, 8 months is the best response
choice as object permanence is clearly developed by 18 months and
“typically” associated with infancy, rather than toddlerhood.
Question Assesses
Human Development, Diversity, and Behavior in the Environment
143. A. Techniques of interviewing should be tailored to the specifics of a
client, not generic, “one size fits all” inquiries. The focus is on the
uniqueness of a client and the client’s unique situation.
The purpose of the social work interview can be informational,
diagnostic, or therapeutic. The same interview may serve more than
one purpose.
Communication during a social work interview is interactive and
interrelational. A social worker’s questions will result in specific
responses by a client that, in turn, lead to other inquiries. The message
is formulated by a client, encoded, transmitted, received, processed,
and decoded. The importance of words and messages may be implicit
(implied) or explicit (evident).
971
144. There are several techniques that a social worker may use during an
interview to assist clients.
Confrontation occurs when social workers call attention to clients’
feelings, attitudes, or behaviors, often when there is inconsistency in
them. Confrontation can be very effective when there is a need to
highlight feelings, attitudes, or behaviors which may be useful to the
therapeutic process.
Interpretation occurs when social workers pull together patterns of
behavior to get a new understanding of client situations or problems.
Clarification uses questioning, paraphrasing, and restating to ensure full
understanding of clients’ ideas and thoughts, including formulation of
the existing problem.
This is a recall question that relies on social workers knowing
techniques of interviewing. In the scenario, there is a lack of
congruence between the wife’s beliefs and actions. Congruence is the
matching of awareness and experience with communication. It is
essential that clients can express themselves and that this
communication is reflective of clients’ feelings. Congruence is essential
for the vitality of a relationship and to facilitate true helping as part of the
problem-solving process. In the scenario, confrontation of the wife’s
actions by the social worker may assist her in seeing that her
perceptions are not supported by the observed interactions during the
sessions.
Question Assesses
Psychotherapy, Clinical Interventions, and Case Management
A. The problem-solving model is based on the belief that an inability to
cope with a problem is due to some lack of motivation, capacity, or
opportunity to solve problems in an appropriate way. Clients’ problem-
solving capacities or resources are maladaptive or impaired. The goal
of the problem-solving process is to enhance the client’s mental,
emotional, and action capacities for coping with problems and/or
making accessible the opportunities and resources necessary to
generate solutions to problems. A social worker engages in the
problem-solving process via the following steps—engaging, assessing,
planning, intervening, evaluating, and terminating.
972
The question contains a qualifying word—FIRST—that is capitalized to
stress the importance of the order in which the actions should occur.
When response choices represent actions that social workers would
take throughout the helping process, using the problem-solving model
(also called the planned change or helping process) can be extremely
helpful in determining their order.
Providing therapy is an intervention. The correct answer, determining
what has been done before to address the problem, takes place during
engagement and assessment—both of which precede intervention.
Anxiety disorders do not go away and require psychotherapy,
medication, or both. It is likely that the client in the scenario has a
treatment history that can be useful in learning about what has worked
and not worked in the past. There is no indication of risk for self-harm
as the client states that he wants to change and is relying on the social
worker to help him start the process.
Question Assesses
Psychotherapy, Clinical Interventions, and Case Management
145. A. Professional objectivity in social worker–client relationships is
critical. This objectivity can be compromised if there is a conflict of
interest in relationships with clients. A conflict of interest is a situation
where regard for one duty may lead to disregard of another. When
faced with potential or actual conflicts of interest, it is important that
social workers consider the perceptions of others (clients, colleagues,
the community, employers, and so on). It is important, therefore, that
social workers are proactive in avoiding conflicts of interest and
discuss any actual conflicts of interests with supervisors or employers
so that they can be resolved. Dual relationships should never be
entered into knowingly even if social workers feel that they can
manage the potential conflicts or feel that there are no significant
issues.
While the mother in this scenario has considerable confidence in the
child’s social worker, there is an apparent conflict of interest for the
social worker in supervising the child’s visits with the father. The social
worker will be expected to provide feedback to the court concerning the
need for ongoing supervision of the dad’s contact with his daughter. The
objectivity in writing the report may be or could be perceived as being
impaired by virtue of the preexisting treatment role with the child. Thus,
973
even if the child and father are comfortable with the social worker taking
on this additional role, it is inadvisable for legal and ethical reasons.
Question Assesses
Professional Values and Ethics
146. B. Reflective listening is a valuable method used to facilitate
communication. Reflective listening is at times used interchangeably
with active or empathic listening. This technique is a way of listening
and responding to clients that improves mutual understanding and
trust. Reflective listening is an essential skill and critical to the
therapeutic process. Empathic listening builds trust and respect with
clients by enabling them to share their emotions and reduce tensions.
It encourages the surfacing of information and creates “safe”
environments that are conducive to collaborative problem solving.
When engaging in empathic listening, social workers should:
■ Concentrate on not talking and pay attention while looking directl
clients
■ Prepare their replies
■ Ask for time to respond if needed
■ Pay attention to how the person is behaving nonverbally (e.g., yellin
screaming and not making eye contact)
■ Demonstrate listening by nodding or shaking head
■ Paraphrase or translate what is said; reflect it back
■ Recognize client feelings (“you seem to be frustrated,” “you sound an
“you seem to be upset”)
■ Be attentive, interested, nonjudgmental, and noncritical
■ Avoid interrupting, changing the subject, interrogating, teaching, and gi
advice
Selecting the correct answer requires knowledge that reflective listening
is a communication strategy involving two key steps: seeking to
understand client ideas and then offering the ideas back to them to
confirm they have been understood correctly. Reflective listening
attempts to reconstruct what clients are thinking and feeling and to relay
this understanding back. While used interchangeably at times with
active listening, reflective listening is a more specific strategy than the
974
more general methods of active listening. It arose from Carl Rogers’
school of client-centered therapy in counseling theory.
The incorrect response choices either do not reflect good listening skills
(anticipating what should be said next) or are not related to listening at
all (helping clients to understand social work roles).
Question Assesses
Psychotherapy, Clinical Interventions, and Case Management
147. A. Interdisciplinary collaboration is a necessary yet challenging social
work activity. When multiple agencies which work with clients act
independently of each other, the result is that clients are subject to
fragmented services, none of which address clients as whole
individuals. A shared vision among collaborators facilitates strategies
to achieve common goals. The biggest benefit of collaboration among
agencies is the improved well-being of clients.
Collaboration among agencies is the key to preventing fragmentation. In
addition to reducing the likelihood of clients falling through the cracks
between disparate and unconnected agencies, collaboration fosters a
more holistic view of clients. With effective collaboration, service
providers recognize differing viewpoints through their contact with
professionals with expertise in different areas. In addition to decreasing
paperwork and minimizing fragmentation, this process could help to
strengthen linkages and communication among various agencies
providing different services to meet clients’ varying needs.
While the benefits listed in the incorrect response choices may result
from collaborations between service providers, the correct answer to
any question on the examination is always the one which speaks to
enhancing the well-being of clients. Interdisciplinary service
collaborations can foster innovation and lead to enhanced
effectiveness. However, they predominantly exist to bring together
professionals from different professions or disciplines. The multifaceted
training and experience of these providers helps to ensure that all client
needs are addressed. The correct answer is the only one that
references the needs of clients across life domains, which is the
principal reason for taking an interdisciplinary approach.
Question Assesses
975
Psychotherapy, Clinical Interventions, and Case Management
148. A. A phobia is an anxiety disorder involving a persistent fear of an
object, place, or situation disproportional to the threat or danger posed
by the object of the fear. The person who has the phobia will go to
great lengths to avoid the object of the fear and experience great
distress if it is encountered. These irrational fears and reactions must
result in interference with social and work life to meet the DSM criteria.
There are five subtypes of specific phobia: animal (including the fear of
snakes, spiders, rodents, and dogs), natural environment (including the
fear of heights, storms, water, and the dark), blood-injection-injury
(including the fear of blood, injury, needles, and medical procedures),
situational (including the fear of enclosed spaces, flying, driving,
tunnels, and bridges), and other. The anxiety must be “out of
proportion” to the threat, considering the environment and situation.
Social phobia, involving fear of social situations, is a separate disorder.
A client who has a specific phobia disorder experiences significant and
persistent fear when in the presence of, or anticipating the presence of,
the object of fear, which may be an object, place, or situation.
The DSM criteria for a specific phobia disorder are:
■ There is a marked and out-of-proportion fear within an environmenta
situational context to the presence or anticipation of a specific objec
situation.
■ Exposure to the phobic stimulus provokes an immediate anxiety respo
which may take the form of a situationally bound or situation
predisposed panic attack.
■ There is recognition that the fear is out of proportion.
■ The phobic situation(s) is avoided or else is endured with intense anx
or distress.
■ The avoidance, anxious anticipation, or distress in the feared situatio
interferes significantly with the person’s normal routine, occupationa
academic) functioning, or social activities or relationships, or ther
marked distress about having the phobia.
The DSM criteria state that the symptoms for all ages must have a
duration of at least 6 months. The anxiety, panic attack, or phobic
avoidance associated with the specific object or situation must not be
better accounted for by another mental disorder.
976
149. Many different types of medications are used in the treatment of anxiety
disorders, including traditional antianxiety drugs such as
benzodiazepines. Because they work quickly—typically bringing relief
within 30 minutes to an hour—they are very effective when taken during
a panic attack or another overwhelming anxiety episode. However, they
can be physically addictive and need to be closely monitored.
This question requires determining the correct diagnosis for the client in
the scenario. Based on the information provided, it appears that the
client has a specific phobia disorder, natural environment type. This
diagnosis, which is an anxiety disorder, is best treated with antianxiety
medications. Thus, the response choices must be reviewed, and the
drugs should next be classified into one of four major types—
antipsychotics, mood stabilizers, antidepressants, or antianxiety
medications. Ativan is the only antianxiety drug listed, making it the
correct response choice.
Risperdal is an antipsychotic medication which is used to control
hallucinations and delusions. Tegretol is a mood stabilizer used for the
treatment of bipolar disorder.
Question Assesses
Assessment, Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning
B. There are many formats for the recording of case notes. Case notes
document activity and client progress. They help social workers identify
effective and ineffective treatment strategies. In addition, if auditors,
advocates, or supervisors look at files, they need to be able to get
clear pictures of clients and learn what has been done, what is
working, and what areas need attention. In addition, without good,
clear case notes, it can be next to impossible for successful client
transition to other professionals should it be needed.
Subjective, objective, assessment, plan (SOAP) is a format used
predominantly in health care facilities. The subjective section includes
clients’ reported symptoms, and the objective section contains test and
exam results. The assessment section includes conclusions and
impressions based on the first two sections. The plan section explains
the next steps, including the need for treatment, medication, and/or
further testing.
977
Another format is referred to as DAP. This format is similar to SOAP
except that both subjective and objective data are included in the same
section. DAP is an acronym that stands for data, assessment, and plan.
The data section includes contact information for clients, subjective and
objective data, and observational notes. Subjective data is a summary
of information given by clients and may include direct quotes. Objective
data includes information often gleaned from direct observation or other
sources, including body movements, facial expressions, test results,
and so on. The assessment is a summary based on subjective and
objective information collected. The last section is the treatment plan,
including any referrals or interventions that have been completed or are
recommended.
Another popular problem-based case recording format is assessed
information, problem addressed, interventions provided, and evaluation
(APIE). The first section includes documentation of assessed
information with regard to clients’ problems while the second is an
explanation of problems that are to be addressed. These sections are
followed by intervention descriptions and plans and evaluations of
problems once interventions are complete, respectively.
The question contains a qualifying word—MOST. While the client may
be using another model, the scenario only describes three distinct
sections, making DAP the probable model. SOAP includes both the
assessment and plan as separate sections, but it also separates the
subjective information from the objective data. Therefore, there are four
separate components of a case record. APIE contains information on
evaluation findings, which are not mentioned in the social worker’s
notes in this question.
Question Assesses
Psychotherapy, Clinical Interventions, and Case Management
150. C. Confidentiality is a cornerstone of healthy therapeutic relationships
and effective treatment and is based upon the ethical principles of
autonomy and fidelity and, to a lesser degree, beneficence and
nonmaleficence. Autonomy assumes clients have the right to decide to
whom they will reveal information, and confidentiality is based upon
respect for clients’ ability to choose what they disclose. Fidelity refers
to social workers’ faithfulness and loyalty to keep promises to clients,
including not revealing information clients disclose. Social workers are
also honest about limits of confidentiality, so clients can make informed
978
decisions about self-disclosure. Beneficence and nonmaleficence have
an important role in confidentiality. Clients benefit when information is
kept confidential and trusting relationships can be achieved. The
disclosure of private information without client consent can do harm to
therapeutic relationships even when such disclosures are mandated by
law.
Issues of confidentiality are often complex, especially when group
therapy is provided. Group psychotherapy is a powerful and curative
method of psychological treatment, but issues of confidentiality are
magnified at least as many times as there are group members. Not only
is information revealed to social workers, information is also revealed to
other group members, and there is no guarantee that other group
members will maintain confidentiality. However, group members expect
complete confidentiality and do not fully understand how confidentiality
in group settings differs from confidentiality in individual therapy.
Informed consent is the process whereby clients learn about
confidentiality. When group treatment is being provided, education
regarding confidentiality should begin prior to entering the group.
Potential group members should be informed that social workers may
have to breach confidentiality in certain circumstances, and those
circumstances should be fully explained. They should also be informed
that social workers can assure confidentiality on their part (within the
constraints of the law) but cannot promise that other group members
will maintain confidentiality. Another important issue to discuss is the
probable lack of privileged communication. Privileged communication
does not usually exist in group settings due to the third-party rule, which
states that information revealed in front of a third party was not intended
to be private and is not privileged. Therefore, group members may be
called to testify against their peers regarding information obtained in
group sessions.
Confidentiality should be discussed openly, thoroughly, and often
among group members. Maintaining confidentiality should be the goal
for group members, and consequences for participation for those who
breach confidentiality should be openly discussed. A common phrase
used in group therapy is, “What is said in group—stays in group.”
However, absolute confidentiality in groups is difficult and often
unrealistic.
This is a recall question which relies on social workers understanding
the ethical standards related to the provision of group versus individual
979
151. therapy. For clients to make informed choices about what they disclose,
it is critical that they understand the confidentiality standards which
apply. The social worker cannot assure the client in this scenario that
information disclosed will be kept confidential as there are no legal
mandates which prohibit group members from sharing it with others.
The client is participating in group therapy, not individual treatment, so it
is not appropriate for the social worker to ask about the nature of the
information outside of the group process. The group is the helping agent
and concerns should be shared with all members, not the social worker
individually. The correct answer provides the client with accurate
information about confidentiality in group treatment and lets him make
the decision on his own about whether to share it during the next
session.
Question Assesses
Psychotherapy, Clinical Interventions, and Case Management
A. Contracts in social work specify goals to be accomplished and tasks
to be performed to achieve these aims. They also set time frames for
interventions and deadlines for completion of goals. They are
agreements between social workers and clients and essential for
positive outcomes. It is essential that goals contained in contracts be
feasible. Unachievable goals set clients up for failure, which can lead
to continued disappointment, disillusionment, and defeat. Chosen
goals should be able to be accomplished. In instances where clients
may have unrealistic expectations, social workers should assist them
in realizing what is realistic.
There are many reasons that desired goals need to be examined and
revised to be realistically achievable. In the scenario, the client has a
limited number of sessions which will be paid by insurance coverage. It
is premature for the social worker to advocate for additional sessions as
there is no new information which would cause the insurance company
to alter its decision. It is unfair for the client to think that the changes
desired will occur in the time frame allotted. The client may become
increasingly discouraged when goals are not achieved, jeopardizing
motivation to reach desired outcomes. Lastly, making progress toward
the target problem should not be abandoned completely as it was
identified and prioritized through the assessment process. Instead, the
social worker should tactfully work with the client to temper expectations
about the amount of change that is possible in the fixed time frame.
980
Question Assesses
Assessment, Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning
152. B. Bartering arrangements, particularly involving services, create the
potential for conflicts of interest, exploitation, and inappropriate
boundaries in social workers’ relationships with clients. Social workers
should avoid accepting goods or services from clients as payment for
professional services. Social workers should explore and may
participate in bartering only in very limited circumstances when it can
be demonstrated that such arrangements are an accepted practice
among professionals in the local community, considered to be essential
for the provision of services, negotiated without coercion, and entered
into at the client’s initiative and with the client’s informed consent.
Social workers who accept goods or services from clients as payment
for professional services assume the full burden of demonstrating that
this arrangement will not be detrimental to the client or the professional
relationship.
While bartering in social work is extremely rare, the NASW Code of
Ethics provides specific guidance about the criteria which must be met
for bartering to occur. While these standards are located in provisions
about payment for services, they speak to the potential that such
financial arrangements have for inappropriate professional boundaries
between social workers and clients.
Social workers—not clients—must demonstrate that bartering
relationships are not detrimental and clients—not social workers—must
initiate the request for bartering arrangements.
Question Assesses
Professional Values and Ethics
153. B. Family systems theory views issues and problems within a circular
fashion, using what is described as a systemic perspective; this means
that the event and the problem exist within the context of the
relationship, where each influences the other. Family systems theory
aims to assess these patterns of interactions and look at why things
may be happening instead of why they happened.
Family systems theory considers the nature of relationships to be
bidirectional and moves away from seeking blame of one person for the
981
dynamic of the relationship. The exception to this theory is within
abusive relationships, where the responsibility and blame lay clearly
with the perpetrator of the abuse.
Within family systems theory, behaviors are believed to arise due to the
interrelated nature and connectedness of various family members. For
example, to seek understanding of children in distress, their behavior
would be viewed through the lens of their family (parent–child)
behaviors and family systems rather than looking at young persons in
isolation. Adultery or infidelity, using a family systems approach, is seen
as a “family affair” that should be understood and treated within the
marital system rather than from an individual perspective. Social
workers use marital therapy to understand the relational dynamics that
led to and/or sustain affairs. They shy away from blame and focus on
issues of intimacy, communication, expectations, agreements, and
conflict management in the marriage.
This is a recall question about family dynamics and functioning. Social
workers should understand family systems theory, as well as the
dynamics of abuse. Those abused should never be seen as contributing
to or responsible for their abuse. As the question asks about “blame for
the dynamics” resting with specific individuals as opposed to resulting
from the action of all parties, a belief contrary to a family systems
approach, the correct answer must involve abuse of one person by
another.
Question Assesses
Human Development, Diversity, and Behavior in the Environment
154. A. Cultural sensitivity refers to a set of skills used in social work
practice that facilitates learning about and understanding clients whose
cultural background may not be the same. Social workers should
operate with the awareness that cultural differences exist between
them and clients without assigning these differences a value. These
differences are positive—not better or worse, right or wrong.
Being culturally sensitive does not mean being an expert in each
culture’s values. It simply means a willingness to ask honest questions,
seek understanding, and demonstrate empathy rather than judging. It
also means that, when knowingly entering spaces in which there will be
cultural differences at play, social workers should do a bit of homework
beforehand and avoid jumping to conclusions.
982
The most important thing when being culturally sensitive is
remembering to ground interactions in the understanding that clients’
background, experiences, and values naturally vary from those of social
workers. These differences should lead to understanding and empathy,
rather than judgment.
This is a recall question which relies on social workers understanding
the effect of culture, race, and ethnicity on behaviors, attitudes, and
identity. The social worker is demonstrating respect and not assuming
that the client would like to be called by a first name. Such action is an
example of cultural sensitivity. Professional boundaries are the invisible
structures which are imposed in therapeutic relationships. The question
to the client is not indicative of a limit placed on the interactions
between the client and social worker. Objectivity concerns examining
issues truthfully and impartially. The social worker is not examining or
viewing information—the social worker is simply asking a question.
Question Assesses
Human Development, Diversity, and Behavior in the Environment
155. C. Social workers should have basic research knowledge to evaluate
the appropriateness of interventions and assist in decision making. The
promotion of evidence-based research within social work is
widespread. Evidence-based research gathers evidence that may be
informative for clinical practice or clinical decision making. It also
involves the process of gathering and synthesizing scientific evidence
from various sources and translating it to be applied to practice.
The use of evidence-based practice places the well-being of clients at
the forefront, desiring to discover and use the best practices available.
The use of evidence-based practices (EBPs) requires social workers to
only use services and techniques that were found effective by rigorous,
scientific, empirical studies—that is, outcome research. Social workers
should be willing and able to locate and use evidence-based
interventions. In areas in which evidence-based interventions are not
available, social workers should still use research to guide practice.
Applying knowledge gleaned from research findings will assist social
workers in providing services informed by scientific investigation and
lead to new interventions that can be evaluated as EBPs.
When reading and interpreting experimental research findings, social
workers should be able to identify independent variables (or those that
983
156. are believed to be causes) and dependent variables (which are the
impacts or results). In many studies, the independent variable is the
treatment provided and the dependent variable is the target behavior
that is trying to be changed. The reliability and validity of research
findings should also be assessed. Reliability is concerned with obtaining
the same findings repeatedly when conditions are not altered. Validity
focuses on accuracy. There are two types of validity—internal validity
and external validity. Internal validity is the confidence that exists that
the independent variable is the cause of the dependent variable and not
extraneous factors. External validity is the extent to which the same
results will be produced if the context or population is altered. It
determines to what extent an intervention can be generalized.
This is a recall question which relies on social workers understanding
key research terms and concepts. Such knowledge is essential to
having a sufficient understanding of KSAs related to the use of
measurable objectives, subjective and objective data, applying research
to practice, and so on. In addition to being able to understand and
explain the meaning of important research terminology, social workers
should be versed in experimental and single-subject research designs.
Question Assesses
Assessment, Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning
C. Anxiety disorders include disorders that share features of excessive
fear and anxiety and related behavioral disturbances. Fear is the
emotional response to real or perceived imminent threat, whereas
anxiety is anticipation of future threat. Fear is more often associated
with surges of autonomic arousal necessary for fight or flight, thoughts
of immediate danger, and escape behaviors, and anxiety is more often
associated with muscle tension and vigilance in preparation for future
danger and cautious or avoidant behaviors. Panic attacks are a type of
fear response. Panic attacks are not limited to anxiety disorders, but
rather can be seen in other mental disorders as well.
Obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) is in its own chapter with
hoarding disorder, trichotillomania (hair-pulling), and so on. Acute stress
disorder is grouped with trauma- and stressor-related disorders.
Separation anxiety disorder is an anxiety disorder based on scientific
evidence that links it with other disorders, such as selective mutism,
specific phobia, social anxiety disorder, agoraphobia, and so on.
984
This is a recall question which relies on social workers knowing the
DSM and its diagnoses. When studying for the examination, social
workers do not need to memorize all the diagnostic criteria, but should
know the defining or distinguishing feelings, thoughts, and behaviors
associated with each disorder. Also, questions may ask about groupings
of disorders—such as those which are neurodevelopmental, psychotic,
depressive, and so on. Thus, being able to recall in which chapter
particular disorders are listed can be helpful, such as is the case in this
question.
Question Assesses
Assessment, Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning
157. A. Erikson’s psychosocial theory of development considers the impact
of various “crises” on personality development from childhood to
adulthood. According to Erikson’s theory, everyone must pass through
a series of eight interrelated stages over the entire life cycle.
1. Infancy
Basic Trust Versus Mistrust
During the first or second year of life, the major emphasis is on
nurturing, especially in terms of visual contact and touch. A child will
develop optimism, trust, confidence, and security if properly cared for
and handled. If a child does not experience trust, the child may develop
insecurity, worthlessness, and general mistrust of the world.
2. Toddler/Early Childhood Years
Autonomy Versus Shame and Doubt
At this point, a child has an opportunity to build self-esteem and
autonomy as the child learns new skills and right from wrong. The well-
cared-for child has a good sense of self and pride rather than shame.
Children tend to be vulnerable during this stage, sometimes feeling
shame and low self-esteem during an inability to learn certain skills.
3. Preschooler
Initiative Versus Guilt
985
During this period, a child experiences a desire to copy adults and take
initiative in creating play situations. A child also begins to use that
wonderful word for exploring the world—“Why?” If a child is frustrated
over natural desires and goals, the child easily experiences guilt. The
most significant relationship is with the basic family.
4. School-Age Child
Industry Versus Inferiority
During this stage, a child is capable of learning, creating, and
accomplishing numerous new skills and knowledge, thus developing a
sense of industry. This is also a very social stage of development; if
there are unresolved feelings of inadequacy and inferiority, there can be
serious problems in terms of competence and self-esteem. As the world
expands a bit, the most significant relationship is with the school and
neighborhood. Parents are no longer the complete authorities they once
were, although they are still important.
5. Adolescence
Identity Versus Role Confusion
Adolescents must struggle to discover and find their own identity, while
negotiating and struggling with social interactions and “fitting in,” as well
as develop a sense of morality and right from wrong. Some adolescents
attempt to delay entrance to adulthood and withdraw from
responsibilities. Those unsuccessful with this stage tend to experience
role confusion and upheaval. Adolescents begin to develop a strong
affiliation and devotion to ideals, causes, and friends.
6. Young Adulthood
Intimacy Versus Isolation
At the young adult stage, people tend to seek companionship and love.
Young adults seek deep intimacy and satisfying relationships, but if they
are unsuccessful, isolation may occur. Significant relationships at this
stage are with marital partners and friends.
7. Middle Adulthood
Generativity Versus Stagnation
During this time, adults strive to create or nurture things that will outlast
them, often by parenting children or contributing to positive changes
986
that benefit other people. Contributing to society and doing things to
benefit future generations are important. Generativity refers to “making
a mark” on the world through caring for others, as well as creating and
accomplishing things that make the world a better place. Stagnation
refers to the failure to find a way to contribute. Those who are
successful during this phase will feel that they are contributing to the
world by being active in their homes and communities. Others may feel
disconnected or uninvolved. Some characteristics of stagnation include
being self-centered, failing to get involved with others, not taking an
interest in productivity, exerting no efforts to improve the self, and
placing one’s concerns over above all else. It is at this point in life that
some experience what is often referred to as a “midlife crisis” and feel
regret. This might involve regretting missed opportunities such as going
to school, pursuing a career, or having children. In some cases, this
crisis is an opportunity to make adjustments that will lead to greater
fulfillment.
8. Late Adulthood
Integrity Versus Despair—Wisdom
The last stage involves much reflection. Some older adults look back
with a feeling of integrity—that is, contentment and fulfillment—having
led a meaningful life and made a valuable contribution to society. Others
have a sense of despair during this stage, reflecting upon their
experiences and failures. They may fear death as they struggle to find a
purpose to their lives, wondering “What was the point of life? Was it
worth it?”
This is a recall question which relies on social workers understanding
the stages of psychosocial development. The scenario provides the age
of the client, as well as his struggles—both of which can assist with
distinguishing the correct answer from the incorrect ones.
Question Assesses
Human Development, Diversity, and Behavior in the Environment
158. C. An ethical dilemma is a predicament in which a social worker
should decide between two viable solutions that seem to have similar
ethical value. Sometimes two viable ethical solutions can conflict with
each other. Social workers should be aware of any conflicts between
personal and professional values and deal with them responsibly. In
987
instances where social workers’ ethical obligations conflict with agency
policies or relevant laws or regulations, they should make a
responsible effort to resolve the conflict in a manner that is consistent
with the values, principles, and standards expressed in the NASW
Code of Ethics.
In order to resolve this conflict, ethical problem solving is needed. There
are six essential steps in ethical problem solving:
1. Identify ethical standards, as defined by the professional code o
which are being compromised (always go to the code of ethics first
rely on a supervisor or coworkers)
2. Determine whether there is an ethical issue or dilemma
3. Weigh ethical issues in light of key social work values and princ
defined by the code of ethics
4. Suggest modifications in light of the prioritized ethical values and p
that are central to the dilemma
5. Implement modifications in light of prioritized ethical values and princ
6. Monitor for new ethical issues or dilemmas
The question contains a qualifying word—NEXT. Its use indicates that
the order in which the response choices should occur is critical.
Knowledge of the sequential steps in the ethical problem-solving
process is needed. The question states that there is already a
realization that an ethical dilemma exists. Once the issue has been
identified, social workers should next weigh ethical issues considering
key social work values and principles.
Seeking supervision is a practical response choice which is incorrect as
it does not represent a step in the ethical problem-solving model. Social
workers often seek supervision when they are not sure of the correct
course of action. The examination expects social workers to have
knowledge about the proper actions to take based on best practices in
the field. Social workers cannot choose a correct course of action based
on prioritized ethical values until they have been weighed considering
existing principles. Thus, this action will occur after the one specified in
the correct answer.
Question Assesses
988
159. Professional Values and Ethics
A. Alcohol withdrawal is a potentially life-threatening condition that can
occur in clients who have been drinking heavily for weeks, months, or
years and then either stop or significantly reduce their alcohol
consumption. Alcohol Withdrawal symptoms can begin as early as 2
hours after the last drink, persist for weeks, and range from mild
anxiety and shakiness to severe complications, such as seizures and
delirium tremens (DTs). DTs are characterized by confusion, rapid
heartbeat, and fever.
Because alcohol withdrawal symptoms can rapidly worsen, it is
important for clients to seek medical attention even if symptoms are
seemingly mild. Appropriate alcohol withdrawal treatments can reduce
the risk of developing withdrawal seizures or DTs.
Prescription drugs of choice include benzodiazepines, such as
diazepam (valium), chlordiazepoxide (librium), lorazepam (ativan), and
so on. Such medications can help control the shakiness, anxiety, and
confusion associated with alcohol withdrawal and reduce the risk of
withdrawal seizures and DTs. In clients with mild to moderate
symptoms, anticonvulsant drugs may be an effective alternative to
benzodiazepines, because they are not sedating and have low potential
for abuse.
Because successful treatment of alcohol withdrawal does not address
the underlying disease of addiction, it should be followed by treatment
for alcohol abuse. Relatively brief outpatient interventions can be
effective, but more intensive therapy may be required. Services range
from 12-step groups—such as Alcoholics Anonymous and Narcotics
Anonymous—to residential treatment that offers a combination of
cognitive behavioral and family therapy.
The question is asking about alcohol withdrawal—not the treatment of
the underlying disorder. Alcohol withdrawal focuses on reducing the
effects of the symptoms and medically monitoring them for serious
health implications. Medications are used to help shakiness, anxiety,
and confusion. Thus, psychopharmacology is the treatment of choice to
address them. The incorrect response choices are effective treatments
for the underlying disease and relapse prevention, which occur after
withdrawal symptoms have been addressed.
Question Assesses
989
Assessment, Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning
160. A. Privileged communication is a legal right, existing by statute or
common law, which protects clients from having confidences revealed
publicly from witnesses stand during legal proceedings. Certain
professionals, including social workers, cannot legally be compelled to
reveal confidential information they received from their clients. The
privilege protects clients, and the right to exercise privilege belongs to
clients, not to professionals.
There are four conditions that are generally accepted as being
necessary for a communication to be considered privileged:
1. The communication must originate in the confidence that it will not
disclosed.
2. The element of confidentiality must be essential to the full and satisfacto
maintenance of the relationship between the parties.
3. The relationship must be one that in the opinion of the community oug
to be fostered.
4. The injury to the relationship caused by disclosure must be greater th
the benefit gained through disclosure for the correct disposal of litigation
The landmark Supreme Court decision on the protection of
psychotherapist–client privilege is Jaffee v. Redmond, 518 U.S. 1
(1996). The case created the right for federal litigants and witnesses to
keep their private psychotherapy records out of the courtroom, rejecting
an approach that would have permitted federal judges to review and
weigh the value of the potential evidence excluded under the privilege.
The Jaffee decision is notable in several respects. For social workers, it
is a landmark ruling recognizing the professionalism and relevance of
social workers providing psychotherapy in today’s mental health
treatment milieu. For trial lawyers and their clients, Jaffee presented a
new rule of evidence, drawing a bright line around a certain type of
evidence that is inaccessible for legal probing. For mental health clients,
the case bolsters the wall of protection afforded to the intimacy of the
therapeutic relationship. Although Jaffee is only directly applicable to
cases filed in federal court, many states have had occasion to review
the Jaffee decision as they decide similar matters under their
jurisdiction.
990
The question contains a qualifying word—BEST. While all the response
choices relate to client privacy, only the correct answer mentions
privilege being a legal term which aims to keep communication from
being disclosed in court proceedings.
Best practice for social workers is to get clients’ written consent when
releasing information, though verbal consent is acceptable in certain
situations. Often treatment information of minors cannot be withheld
from parents, though laws vary across states/jurisdictions given the
ages of minors and types of treatment received. This response choice is
also incorrect as it is not related to privilege but concerns instead
another important privacy topic.
Question Assesses
Professional Values and Ethics
161. B. A forensic interview of a child is a developmentally sensitive and
legally sound method of gathering factual information regarding
allegations of abuse or exposure to violence. This interview is
conducted by a competently trained, neutral professional, such as a
social worker, utilizing research and practice.
A forensic interview is one component of a comprehensive child abuse
investigation, which includes, but is not limited to, the following
disciplines: law enforcement and child protection investigators,
prosecutors, child protection attorneys, victim advocates, and medical
and mental health practitioners. Forensic interviewing is a first step in
most child protective services investigations, one in which a
professional interviews a child to find out if the child has been
maltreated. In addition to yielding the information needed to decide
whether abuse or neglect has occurred, this approach produces
evidence that will stand up in court if the investigation leads to criminal
prosecution. Properly conducted forensic interviews are legally sound in
part because they ensure the interviewer’s objectivity, employ
nonleading techniques, and emphasize careful documentation of the
interview.
A fuller understanding of forensic interviewing and its role in child
welfare can be gained by comparing it with social work interviewing,
another type of interviewing commonly used by child welfare workers.
The social work interview allows social workers to assess and identify a
family’s strengths and needs and develop a service plan with the family.
991
This broad, versatile approach incorporates the use of a variety of
interviewing techniques. Social work interviewing is used at every step
of child welfare, from intake through closure; it is used with individuals,
groups, children. and adults.
Although it employs some of the same techniques as the social work
interview, such as open-ended and forced-choice questions, the
forensic interview is much more focused. Generally, it is used only
during the assessment portion of an investigation and involves only the
children who are the subject of the investigation. Forensic denotes the
scientific methods and techniques used in the investigation of crime. Its
use relates to the collection of evidence used for prosecution. This
question requires social workers to be knowledgeable about legal terms
and the distinction between forensic and social work interviewing.
Question Assesses
Professional Values and Ethics
162. A. Maslow’s hierarchy of needs is a motivational theory comprising a
five-tier model of human needs, often depicted as hierarchical levels
within a pyramid. Maslow stated that people are motivated to achieve
certain needs and that some needs take precedence over others. The
most basic need is for physical survival, which will be the first thing that
motivates behavior. This five-tier model can be divided into deficiency
needs and growth needs. The first four levels are often referred to as
deficiency needs and the top level is known as growth needs. Growth
needs can never be satisfied completely. They consist of the need to
know and understand. They are linked to self-actualization.
Deficiency needs are said to motivate people when they are unmet.
Also, the need to fulfill such needs will become stronger the longer the
duration they are denied. Lower-level deficit needs must be satisfied
before progressing on to meet higher level growth needs. When a deficit
need has been satisfied it will go away, and our activities become
habitually directed toward meeting the next set of needs that we have
yet to satisfy. These then become our salient needs. However, growth
needs continue to be felt and may even become stronger once they
have been engaged.
Often the names of theorists are not mentioned in questions. However,
reasoning using their work is essential to successfully select the correct
answers. Maslow’s hierarchy of needs can be divided into basic (or
992
deficiency) needs (i.e., physiological, safety, social, and esteem) and
growth needs (i.e., self-actualization). “Deficiency needs” arise due to
deprivation, according to Maslow.
Question Assesses
Human Development, Diversity, and Behavior in the Environment
163. B. Social workers’ ethical responsibilities include those related to
payment for services. When setting fees, social workers should ensure
that the fees are fair, reasonable, and commensurate with the services
performed. Consideration should be given to clients’ ability to pay.
Social workers should avoid accepting goods or services from clients
as payment for professional services. Bartering arrangements,
particularly involving services, create the potential for conflicts of
interest, exploitation, and inappropriate boundaries in social workers’
relationships with clients. Social workers should explore and may
participate in bartering only in very limited circumstances when it can
be demonstrated that such arrangements are an accepted practice
among professionals in the local community, considered to be essential
for the provision of services, negotiated without coercion, and entered
into at the client’s initiative and with the client’s informed consent.
Social workers who accept goods or services from clients as payment
for professional services assume the full burden of demonstrating that
this arrangement will not be detrimental to the client or the professional
relationship.
Social workers in fee-for-service settings may terminate services to
clients who are not paying an overdue balance if the financial
contractual arrangements have been made clear to the client, if the
client does not pose an imminent danger to self or others, and if the
clinical and other consequences of the current nonpayment have been
addressed and discussed with the client. Social workers should not
terminate services to pursue a social, financial, or sexual relationship
with a client.
Social workers should not solicit a private fee or other remuneration for
providing services to clients who are entitled to such available services
through the social workers’ employer or agency.
This is a recall question which requires social workers to select the
unethical action “according to the professional code of ethics.” While the
examination will never refer directly to the NASW Code of Ethics as
993
there are other professional organizations with ethical mandates, it is
helpful to read the NASW Code of Ethics and remember its standards
when choosing between response choices. Most questions on the
examination will focus on the first section, which addresses social
workers’ ethical responsibilities to clients. The correct answer is always
the one which most closely mirrors the standard which is explicitly
stated in the NASW Code of Ethics.
Question Assesses
Professional Values and Ethics
164. C. According to the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental
Disorders (DSM), to meet the criteria for diagnosis of schizophrenia, a
client must have experienced at least two of the following symptoms:
■ Delusions
■ Hallucinations
■ Disorganized speech
■ Disorganized or catatonic behavior
■ Negative symptoms
At least one of the symptoms must be the presence of delusions,
hallucinations, or disorganized speech.
Continuous signs of the disturbance must persist for at least 6 months,
during which the client must experience at least 1 month of active
symptoms (or less if successfully treated), with social or occupational
deterioration problems occurring over a significant amount of time.
These problems must not be attributable to another condition.
Treatments for schizophrenia are aimed at reducing or eliminating
symptoms such as hallucinations, delusions, and jumbled speech.
There is, however, no cure for schizophrenia. Most clients will require
both medications and psychotherapy. Antipsychotics are a class of
psychiatric medication primarily used to manage psychosis (including
delusions, hallucinations, paranoia, or disordered thought), principally in
schizophrenia. However, their long-term use is associated with
significant side effects such as involuntary movement disorders and
metabolic syndrome.
994
This question requires determining the correct diagnosis for the client in
the scenario. Based on the information provided, it appears that the
client has schizophrenia. This diagnosis is listed in the DSM with
schizophrenia spectrum and other disorders, such as delusional
disorder, brief psychotic disorder, schizophreniform disorder,
schizoaffective disorder, and so on. These disorders are generally
treated with antipsychotic medications. Thus, the response choices
must be reviewed, and the drugs must next be classified into one of four
major types—antipsychotics, mood stabilizers, antidepressants, or
antianxiety medications. Clozaril is the only antipsychotic drug listed,
making it the correct response choice.
Prozac are antidepressant medications while lithium is a mood stabilizer
used for the treatment of bipolar disorder.
Question Assesses
Assessment, Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning
165. A. From the structural perspective, roles are the culturally defined
norms—rights, duties, expectations, and standards for behavior—
associated with a given social position. In other words, social position
is seen as influencing behaviors. In addition, statuses such as gender,
ethnicity, sexual orientation, and social class also shape roles. For
example, as a mother, a woman is expected to place the care of her
child above all other concerns. However, this normative expectation
varies across cultures, with some cultures expecting mothers to be
paid workers as well. Many cultures believe that women with
preschool-age children should not work outside of the home and that
their children will suffer if they do.
The actual enactment of role behavior, however, may not correspond to
the role expectations. Role competence, or success in carrying out a
role, can vary depending on social contexts and resources. In countries
with strong normative expectations for women to be full-time mothers,
single mothers and low-income mothers often must violate these role
expectations and have been criticized as less competent mothers as a
result.
Indeed, there is pressure to conform successfully to roles. Sanctions
are used as tools of enforcement. Punishments for not following the role
of mother can range from informal sanctions, such as rebukes from
family members to formal sanctions, such as divorce. Social workers
995
should be aware of social role theory and view problems as emerging
from interactions between clients and their environments. Person-in-
environment perspectives are sensitive to role conflicts experienced by
clients.
Cultural bias involves a prejudice or highlighted distinction in viewpoint
that suggests a preference of one culture over another. There are
cultural differences in views between the client and her husband’s
family, but the problem does not stem from cultural bias. If cultural bias
existed, intervention would focus on education of the client about
diverse perspectives. The client recognizes the views of her husband’s
family and does not appear to see her views as superior. However, she
is unhappy due to the conflict that exists between the fulfillment of the
various roles.
Social injustice is an unfair practice that results in violation of human
rights. Her problem is a personal one and not an indicator of social
injustice.
Question Assesses
Human Development, Diversity, and Behavior in the Environment
166. B. A doorknob disclosure is an uncomfortable, painful, or
embarrassing revelation offered at the end of a session, usually by a
client who is leaving. Social workers often see clients reveal their most
painful conflicts during the last 30 seconds of sessions, just when they
are ready to leave. Often, they already have their hands on the
doorknobs. These revelations may be new issues or other aspects of
problems already discussed.
The two main reasons for doorknob disclosures are (a) the need to
gauge reactions because of fear, rejection, or judgment about the
disclosed material; and (b) the need to prolong the helping relationship
by extending the session or number of sessions due to fear of not being
able to cope without support.
Doorknob disclosures are often a form of resistance. Bringing up
important material or intense emotions at the end of sessions, rather
than earlier, ensures that there will not be enough time to deal with
these issues.
996
Social workers should be skilled in the principles of communication—
encouraging clients to raise all issues early in the session and
therapeutic process. Social workers should also help manage the time
in sessions—giving clients ample notice of when sessions are drawing
to an end, which is an inappropriate time to bring up new concerns or
topics.
Immediate responses to doorknob disclosures need to be to reassure
clients that they will get to discuss material at the next sessions (once
ruling out that there is an immediate safety issue that requires
immediate attention). If the disclosure comes from a fear of coping
alone or ending the therapeutic relationship, time should be spent
discussing this issue—rather than the disclosure itself.
The question contains a qualifying word—MOST. While clients may use
doorknob disclosures for more than one purpose, revealing information
in this manner clearly stems from fear. Clients want the safety of
gauging social workers’ reactions to the material and/or lack time to
discuss revelations more fully. It can be comforting to clients to bring up
painful or sensitive topics in this manner as they have the knowledge
that they will not have to explore them in more depth until the next
session, giving them time to feel content with even saying the
information aloud.
Question Assesses
Psychotherapy, Clinical Interventions, and Case Management
167. B. Death is just one life event or crisis which impacts families. When
deaths of family members occur, children go through a series of stages
in trying to understand its meaning. For example, preschool children
usually see death as reversible, temporary, and impersonal. Watching
cartoon characters on television miraculously come alive again after
having been crushed or blown apart tends to reinforce this notion. In
order to identify when death is truly understood by children, it is
necessary to outline the complex concepts associated with death,
including:
■ Irreversibility or finality, the understanding that the dead cannot come b
to life
■ Universality or applicability, the understanding that all living things (
only living things) die
997
■ Personal mortality, the understanding that death applies to oneself
■ Inevitability, the understanding that all living things must die eventually
■ Cessation or nonfunctionality, the understanding that bodily and me
functions cease after death
■ Causality, the understanding that death is ultimately caused b
breakdown of bodily functions
■ Unpredictability, the understanding that the timing of (natural) death is
known in advance
Piaget’s cognitive developmental stages indicate that these death
concepts cannot really be understood by someone until age 7 years at
the absolute earliest. Using Piaget’s model, child understanding
emerges as follows:
First stage—Preoperational (2–7 years)—Children think of death as a
temporary or reversible state and tend to characterize death with
respect to concrete behaviors such as being still or having closed eyes
or departing.
Second stage—Concrete operational (7–11 years)—Children recognize
that all living things must die, and that death is irreversible; however,
they consider death to be caused by concrete elements originating from
outside the body and do not recognize death as an intrinsic and natural
part of the life cycle.
Final stage—Formal operational (11 years and older)—Children hold an
adult view of death as an inevitable, universal final stage in the life cycle
of all living things, characterized by the cessation of bodily functions.
Thus, children’s understanding of death is truly linked to cognitive
developmental maturation.
If the age of a client is mentioned in a scenario, it is usually relevant in
selecting the correct response choice. The age is a useful hint of where
a client is in the life course and what might be expected with regard to
cognitive, emotional, and/or social development.
This scenario requires knowledge about the complex concepts
associated with death as well as child development. Most questions,
like this one, require an integration of several knowledge areas.
Memorization is not needed when studying, but instead the ability to
apply knowledge learned.
998
As the child is only 4 years old, each response choice must be
evaluated based on the theoretical knowledge about cognition at this
age. As the beginning of abstract thought does not occur until age 7, the
child would see death as a temporary or reversible state, like being
asleep. Additionally, children find death to be an emotionally charged
issue, reacting with sadness, anxiety, and fear over separation—not a
feeling of comfort.
Question Assesses
Human Development, Diversity, and Behavior in the Environment
168. A. Social workers should respect clients’ right to privacy and
confidentiality. Social workers may disclose confidential information
when appropriate with valid consent from a client or a person legally
authorized to consent on behalf of a client. Social workers should
protect the confidentiality of all information obtained in the course of
professional service, except for compelling professional reasons. The
general expectation that social workers will keep information
confidential does not apply when disclosure is necessary to prevent
serious, foreseeable, and imminent harm to a client or others such as
duty to warn, child abuse, and so on.
In these instances, social workers should inform clients, to the extent
possible and when feasible, about the disclosure of confidential
information and the potential consequences before the disclosure is
made due to being legally required or client consent. In all instances,
social workers should disclose the least amount of confidential
information necessary to achieve the desired purpose; only information
that is directly relevant to the purpose for which the disclosure is made
should be revealed.
The NASW Code of Ethics explicitly acknowledges social workers’
ethical obligation to inform clients, to the extent possible, of the need to
make mandatory reports due to suspected child maltreatment. This
obligation should not result in delays in reporting. Additionally, informing
clients does not mean that social workers should be deterred in any way
from reporting based upon clients’ reactions. Social workers should be
honest with clients throughout the problem-solving process. Clients
should be aware of social workers’ obligations for mandatory reporting
since it is to be discussed as soon as possible in social worker–client
relationships and as needed throughout the course of these
relationships.
999
Question Assesses
Professional Values and Ethics
169. B. The NASW Code of Ethics explicitly acknowledges that social
workers should not provide clinical services to individuals with whom
they have had a prior sexual relationship. Providing clinical services to
a former sexual partner has the potential to be harmful to the individual
and is likely to make it difficult for a social worker and individual to
maintain appropriate professional boundaries. In addition, social
workers should not engage in sexual activities or sexual contact with
current or former clients or clients’ relatives or other individuals with
whom clients maintain a close personal relationship when there is a
risk of exploitation or potential harm to a client (NASW Code of Ethics
—Sexual Relationships).
In the scenario, the social worker is aware that the referral is for a
woman with whom he had a prior intimate relationship. According to the
NASW Code of Ethics, it is unethical to provide clinical services to this
client. Since there should be no therapeutic relationship between them,
meeting with the client to discuss her problem or scheduling an intake
are both inappropriate. Informing a supervisor is advisable, but not a
sufficient action to properly “act ethically in this situation.” The social
worker should decline the referral even if he is the only Spanish-
speaking clinician. Services may need to be located for the client at
another agency if there is no one linguistically competent to counsel her
at the existing one.
Question Assesses
Professional Values and Ethics
170. C. Cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) combines cognitive and
behavioral therapies. The basic premise of CBT is that emotions are
difficult to change directly, so CBT targets emotions by changing
thoughts and behaviors that are contributing to the distressing
emotions. CBT builds a set of skills that enables an individual to be
aware of thoughts and emotions; identify how situations, thoughts, and
behaviors influence emotions; and improve feelings by changing
dysfunctional thoughts and behaviors. The process of CBT skill
acquisition is collaborative. Skill acquisition and homework
assignments are what set CBT apart from “talk therapies.” Brief CBT is
1000
the compression of CBT material and the reduction of the average 12
to 20 sessions into 4 to 8 sessions. In brief CBT, the concentration is
on specific treatments for a limited number of client problems.
Specificity of the treatment is required because of the limited number
of sessions and because a client is required to be diligent in using
extra reading materials and homework to assist in therapeutic growth.
Brief CBT can range in duration from client to client and provider to
provider.
Certain problems are more appropriate for brief therapy than others.
Problems amenable to brief CBT include, but are not limited to,
adjustment, anxiety, and depressive disorders. Therapy also may be
useful for problems that target specific symptoms (e.g., depressive
thinking) or lifestyle changes (e.g., problem solving, relaxation), whether
or not these issues are part of a formal psychiatric diagnosis. Brief CBT
is particularly useful in a primary care setting for clients with anxiety and
depression associated with a medical condition. Because these clients
often face acute rather than chronic mental health issues and have
many coping strategies already in place, brief CBT can be used to
enhance adjustment. Issues that may be addressed in primary care
include, but are not limited to, diet, exercise, medication compliance,
mental health issues associated with a medical condition, and coping
with a chronic illness or new diagnosis.
Central to selecting the correct response choice is recognizing that the
intervention modality mentioned in the question is brief therapy. Brief
therapy is a systematic, focused process that relies on assessment,
client engagement, and rapid implementation of change strategies. Brief
therapy providers can effect important changes in client behavior within
a relatively short period.
Substance use disorders are chronic, requiring long-term support. Brief
therapy for substance abuse treatment can be a valuable, but limited,
approach and it should not be considered a standard of care.
Dissociative identity disorder (DID), formerly called multiple personality
disorder, is a condition that characterized by the presence of at least
two clear personality states, called alters, which may have different
reactions, emotions, and body functioning. While there is no “cure” for
DID, long-term treatment is very successful. Effective treatment
includes talk therapy or psychotherapy, medications, hypnotherapy, and
adjunctive therapies to help clients with DID improve their relationships
with others, prevent crises, and experience uncomfortable feelings.
1001
Because oftentimes the symptoms of dissociative disorders occur with
other disorders, such as anxiety and depression, Dissociative disorders
may be treated using the same drugs prescribed for those disorders.
Question Assesses
Assessment, Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning
1002
Overall Results of Clinical Test
1003